

THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 




THE STERN Of THE Pearl. 



PIERRE AND JEAN 

With a Preface by the Author 
GUY DE MAUPASSANT 



TRANSLATED BY 

II UGH C R A I G 

AND ILLUSTRATED BY 

ERNEST DUEZ and ALBERT LYNCH 



* 



NEW YORK 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, Limited 

119 axt) 121 West 230 Street 



GUY DE MAUPASSANT 



PIERRE AND JEAN 

WITH A PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR 
Translated by HUGH CRAIG 



AND ILLUSTRATED BV 



ERNEST DUEZ AND ALBERT LYNCH 




•wr 



GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, Limited 

New York : 9 Lafayette Place 
London. Glasgow and Manchester 



Copyright, 1890. 
By Hlgii Craig. 



Press of J. J. Little & Co., 
Astor Place, New York. 



"TO 









"THE NOVEL" 



I have no intention of pleading here the 
cause of the following little novel. On the 
contrary, the ideas which I shall attempt to 
elucidate would involve rather a criticism of 
the style of psychological study which I have 
undertaken in " Pierre and Jean." 

I wish to discuss the novel in general. 

I am not the only one to whom the same 
reproach is addressed by the same critics 
every time that a new book appears. 



20331 6.1 



iv "The Novel." 

In the midst of eulogistic phrases I regu- 
larly find the following, by the same pens : 

" The greatest defect of this work is that 
it is not a novel, properly speaking." 

One could reply by the same argument : 

" The greatest defect of the writer, who 
does me the honor to sit in judgment on my 
work, is that he is not a critic." 

What, in fact, are the essential character- 
istics of a critic ? 

He must, without partisanship, without 
preconceived opinions, without the ideas of 
any school, without any connection with any 
clique of artists — he must comprehend, dis- 
tinguish, and explain the most opposite ten- 
dencies and the most contrary temperaments, 
and accept artistic essays of the most diverse 
forms. 

The critic who, after Manon Lescaut, Paul 
and Virginia, Don Quixote, Les Liaisons Dan- 
gereuses, Werther, the Elective Affinities, Cla- 
rissa Harlowe, Einile, Candide, Cinq-Mars, 



"The Novel r v 

Rend, the Three Musketeers, Mauprat, Le 
Pere Goriot, Cousine Bette, Colombe, Lc Rouge 

ct le Noir, Mademoiselle de Maupin, Notre 
Dame de Paris, Salambbo, Madame Bovary, 
Adolphe, M. de Camors, LAssommoir, Sapho, 
etc., still dares to write, " This is a novel and 
this is not," seems to me endowed with a per- 
spicacity which is very much like incompe- 
tence. 

Such a critic usually understands by a 
novel an adventure more or less probable, 
arranged like a dramatic piece in three acts ; 
the first containing the exposition, the second 
the action, and the last the denouement. 

This manner of composing a novel is cer- 
tainly admissible on condition that we accept 
all the others equally. 

Do there exist rules for writing a novel, 
outside of which a written narrative ought to 
bear another name ? 

If Don Quixote is a novel, is Le Rouge et 
le Noir another ? If Monte Cristo is one, is 



The Novel r 



L'Assommoir another ? Can any comparison 
be established between the Elective Affinities 
of Goethe, the Three Musketeers of Dumas, 
Madame Bovary by Flaubert, M. tie Camors 
by Octave Feuillet, and the Germinal of 
Zola? Which of these works is a novel? 
Where are the famous rules ? Where did 
they come from ? Who established them ? 
In virtue of what principle, what authority, 
what course of reasoning, do they exist ? 

It seems, however, that our critics know, 
in some certain, indubitable fashion, what 
constitutes a novel, and what distinguishes it 
from another which is not one. This simply 
means that, without being producers, they 
are enlisted in a certain school, and reject, 
just like the novelists themselves, all works 
conceived and executed outside of their sys- 
tem of aesthetics. 

An intelligent critic, on the contrary, ought 
to seek for everything which does not in the 
least resemble novels already written, and to 



"The Novel" 



urge, as much as possible, young authors to 
attempt new paths. 

All writers, Victor Hugo as well as Zola, 
have persistently claimed the absolute, indis- 
putable right of composing ; that is, of imag- 
ining or observing, according to their personal 
conception of art. Talent comes from origi- 
nality, which is a special manner of thinking, 
seeing, understanding, and judging. Now, 
the critic who assumes to define the " Novel " 
according to the ideas he has formed from 
the novels he likes, and to lay down certain 
invariable rules of composition, will always be 
hostile to the genius of the artist who intro- 
duces a new manner. A critic who would 
really merit the name ought to be nothing 
but an analyst, without bias, without prefer- 
ences, without passions ; and he ought, like a 
judge of paintings, only to take account of the 
artistic value of the object of art submitted 
to him. His comprehension ought to be all- 
embracing, and ought to absorb so com- 



viii " The Novel." 

pletely his personality that he can praise and 
commend the very books which, as a man, 
he does not like, and which, as a judge, he 
must take note of. 

Most critics, however, are merely readers ; 
and the result is that they nearly always find 
fault with us on false grounds, or compliment 
us without reserve or measure. 

The reader who seeks in a book merely to 
satisfy the natural bent of his mind demands 
that the writer shall minister to his predomi- 
nant taste ; and he invariably describes as 
remarkable or " well written " the work or 
the passage which pleases his imagination, be 
it idealistic, gay, loose, sad, dreamy, or posi- 
tive. 

In brief, the public is composed of numer- 
ous groups, that cry out to us : 

" Comfort me." 

" Amuse me." 

" Touch my sympathies." 

" Make me sad." 



"7 Vie Novel r 



" Make me dream." 

" Make me laugh." 

" Make me shiver." 

" Make me weep." 

" Make me think." 

Some chosen spirits alone ask of the artist : 

" Make something beautiful, in the form 
which suits you best according to your tem- 
perament." 

The artist essays, succeeds or fails. The 
critic ought to judge of the result only by 
the nature of the effort : he has no right to 
take account of tendencies. 

This has been written a thousand times 
already, but it will be always necessary to 
repeat it. 

Thus, after the literary schools, which have 
sought to give us a deformed, superhuman, 
poetic, tender, charming, or superb vision of 
life, there has come a realistic or naturalistic 
school, which professes to show us the truth, 
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. 



x "The Novel." 

These different schools of art must be 
accepted with equal interest, and the works 
that they produce must be judged solely from 
the point of view of their artistic value, 
admitting a priori the general ideas which 
give birth to them. 

To deny the right of a writer to compose 
a poetic work or a realistic work, is to seek 
to force him to modify his temperament, to 
reject his originality, and not to make use of 
the eye and the intelligence which Nature has 
bestowed on him. 

To reproach him for seeing beautiful or 
hideous things, small or epic things, gracious 
or displeasing things, is to reproach him with 
being formed in such or such a manner, and 
with not having a power of vision that agrees 
with ours. 

Let us leave him free to comprehend, to 
observe, to conceive, as he pleases, provided 
he be an artist. Let us rise to the heights of 
poetry when we judge an idealist, and prove 



"The Novel." xi 

that his dream is commonplace, vulgar, not 
mad enough or magnificent enough. But if 
we judge a naturalist, let us show him wherein 
truth in life differs from truth in his book. 

It is evident that schools that differ so 
widely must employ absolutely opposite meth- 
ods of composition. 

The novelist who takes the brutal, unpleas- 
ant, unchanging truth, and strives to draw 
from it some exciting and exceptional adven- 
ture, ought, without any exaggerated regard 
for probability, to manipulate events at his 
pleasure, and prepare and arrange them to 
arouse the reader's pleasure, emotion, or 
sympathy. The plan of his novel is a mere 
series of ingenious combinations skilfully 
leading to the denouement. The incidents are 
disposed and graduated to the culminating 
point and final effect, which is a decisive, 
dominant event, satisfying all the curiosity 
awaked at the opening, barring any further 
interest, and terminating so completely the 



xii u T/ie Novel." 



story told that we no longer desire to know 
what will happen to-morrow to the personages 
in whom we have been most wrapped up. 

The novelist, on the other hand, who pro- 
fesses to give us an exact image of life, ought 
carefully to avoid every concatenation of 
events that seems exceptional. His object is 
not to tell a story, to amuse us, to touch our 
pity, but to force us to think and understand 
the deep, hidden sense of events. Through 
having seen and meditated, he regards the 
universe, things, facts, and men in a certain 
fashion which is peculiar to him, and which 
results from the entire assemblage of his 
observations and reflections thereon. He 
seeks to impart to us this personal vision of 
the world by reproducing it in his book. In 
order to move us as he himself has been 
moved by the spectacle of life, he must re- 
produce it before our eyes with scrupulous 
accuracy. He will have then to compose his 
work in such a skilful manner, and with such 



"The Novel" 



concealment of his manner, and with such 
simplicity in appearance, that it is impossible 
to perceive or indicate his plan or discover 
his intentions. 

In place of plotting out an adventure, and 
developing it in a manner to render it inter- 
esting down to the denouement, he will intro- 
duce his personage or personages at a certain 
period of their lives, and conduct them, by 
natural transitions, down to the following 
period. In this wise he will show, at times, 
how the spirit is modified under the influence 
of surrounding circumstances ; at times, how 
the sentiments and the passions are devel- 
oped ; how we love, hate, combat in all social 
environments ; how the interests of the trades- 
man, the interests of money, the interests of 
family, and political interests struggle with 
one another. 

The skilful execution of his plan, then, will 
not consist in emotion or charm, in a fascinat- 
ing beginning or a moving catastrophe, but 



xiv "The Novel" 

in the adroit grouping of little constant facts 
from which the definitive meaning of the 
work will disengage itself. If he comprises 
in three hundred pages ten years of a life 
for the purpose of showing what it was, in 
the midst of all the beings which surrounded 
it, in all its peculiar and characteristic signifi- 
cation, he ought to know how to eliminate, 
among the innumerable little daily events, all 
those which are useless to him, and to place 
in a strong and distinct light all those which 
would have remained unperceived for observ- 
ers less clear-sighted, and which give his 
book its power and its value as a whole. 

It is seen that such a manner of compos- 
ing, so different from the ancient method open 
to every eye, often throws the critics off the 
track, and that they do not discover the fine, 
secret, almost invisible thread employed by 
certain modern artists in place of the single 
string which was called "plot." 

In brief, if the novelist of yesterday selected 



"The Noveir xv 

and related the crises of life, and poignant 
states of soul and heart, the novelist of to- 
day writes the history of the heart, the soul, 
and the intellect in their normal conditions. 
To produce the effect he aims at, that is, the 
feeling of simple reality, and to bring out the 
artistic lesson which he is about to draw from 
it, that is, the revelation of what is truly the 
contemporary man before his eyes — he must 
employ only facts of incontestable and un- 
swerving truth. But, if we place ourselves at 
the very point of view of these realistic artists, 
we must discuss and contest their theory, 
which seems to admit of being summed up in 
these words, " The whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth." 

Their intention being to bring out the 
philosophy of certain constant, current facts, 
they must often correct and change events to 
the profit of probability and the detriment 
of truth, for 

" Le vrai petit qitelquefois n'etre pas vraisetnblable ." 



xvi "The Novel." 



The realist, if he is an artist, will seek, not 
to show us a vulgar photograph of life, but 
to give us a more complete, striking, and 
probable vision of life than the reality itself. 

It would be impossible to recount every- 
thing, for it would require a volume at least 
every day to enumerate the multitude of 
insignificant incidents that fill up our exist- 
ence. 

Some selection is therefore imposed on the 
writer, and this is the first blow at the theory 
of the " whole truth." 

Life, besides, is composed of the most 
different, most unforeseen, most contrary, and 
most disparate things ; it is headstrong, with- 
out sequence or connection, full of inexpli- 
cable, illogical, and contradictory catastro- 
phes which ought to be classed under the 
heading "Current Events." 

This is the reason why the artist, having 
chosen his theme, will not take, in this life, 
encumbered as it is with chances and fatali- 



"The Novel r xvii 

ties, anything but the characteristic details 
useful to his subject, and he will fling all the 
rest to one side. 

One example out of a thousand : The 
number of people who die every day in this 
world by accident is considerable. But can 
we make a tile fall on the head of a principal 
personage, or throw him under the wheels of 
a carriage, in the middle of a story, under 
the pretext that it is necessary to introduce 
an accident ? 

Life, again, leaves everything on the same 
plane, and precipitates facts or drags them 
out indefinitely. Art, on the contrary, con- 
sists in using precautions and preparations, in 
managing unobtrusive and clever transitions, 
in placing in full light, by simple skill in com- 
position, the essential events, and in giving to 
all the others the degree of relief that suits 
them according to their importance, in order 
to produce a profound sensation of the spe- 
cial truth which it is sought to display. 



xviii "The Novel." 

To write the truth, then, consists in pre- 
senting a complete illusion of the truth, fol- 
lowing the ordinary logic of facts, and not in 
transcribing them pell-mell in the order of 
their successive occurrence. 

Hence, I conclude that the Realists of 
talent ought rather to call themselves the 
Illusionists. 

What child's play, too, to believe in Reality 
when we each carry our own reality in our 
thoughts and our organs ! Our eyes, our ears, 
our sense of smell, our taste, are all different, 
and create as many verities as there are men 
on the earth. And our spirits, receiving their 
information from these organs, are diversely 
impressed, and understand, analyze, and judge 
as if each of us belonged to a different race. 

Each of us, then, simply creates for himself 
an illusionary picture of the world — illusions 
poetic, sentimental, joyful, melancholy, foul, 
or lugubrious, according to his nature. And 
the writer has no other mission beyond repro- 



"The Novel r 



during faithfully this illusion, with all the 
artistic processes which he has learned and of 
which he can dispose. 

Illusion of the beautiful, a mere human 
convention ! Illusion of the disagreeable, 
a changing opinion ! Illusion of the true, 
never immutable ! Illusion of the ignoble, 
so attractive to many ! Great artists are 
those who impose on mankind their par- 
ticular illusions ! 

Let us not, then, lose our tempers about 
any theory, since each of them is simply the 
generalized expression of an analyzing tem- 
perament. 

Two theories, above all, have been often 
discussed, and have been opposed to each 
other instead of both one and other being 
admitted ; these are the theories of the an- 
alytic romance and the objective romance. 
The partisans of analysis demand that the 
writer shall strive to indicate the slightest 
evolutions of a soul, and all the most secret 



"The Navel r 



motives which determine our actions, while 
they allow only a very secondary importance 
to the resulting fact. That is merely a point 
that is reached, a simple limit, the pretext for 
a novel. It would be necessary, then, ac- 
cording to them, to write these works, whether 
precise or fanciful, in which imagination is 
confounded with observation, after the man- 
ner of a philosopher composing a book on 
psychology — to lay bare causes by tracing 
them to their most distant sources, to tell all 
the whys of all resolves, and to clearly discern 
all the struggles of a soul acting under the 
impulse of interest, passion, or instinct. 

The partisans of objectivity (what a vile 
word !) profess, on the contrary, to give us an 
exact representation of what takes place in 
life ; they avoid carefully all complicated 
explanations, and all dissertations on motives, 
and limit themselves to placing before our 
eyes personages and events. 

In their view, psychology ought to be hid- 



*The Novel r xxi 

den in a hook, as it is hidden in reality under 
the facts of existence. 

Novels conceived on this plan gain thereby 
interest, movement in narrative, color, and 
hustling life. 

In place, then, of explaining at length 
the state of mind of a personage, objective 
authors seek for the action or the gesture to 
which this state of mind would inevitably lead 
the man in a certain determinate situation. 
And they make him conduct himself in such 
a manner, from one end of the volume to the 
other, that all his acts and movements are 
the reflection of his inmost nature, of all his 
thoughts, all his resolves, or all his hesitations. 
They hide their psychology instead of display- 
ing it ; they make it the framework of the 
book, as the invisible bony system is the frame 
of the human body. The painter who paints 
our portrait does not show our skeleton. 

It seems to me that a novel thus executed 
gains likewise insincerity. In the first place, 



xxii "The Novel." 

it is nearer the truth, for the people we see 
in action around us do not relate to us the 
motives they obey. 

We must, in the next place, take this into 
account, that if, by means of observation, we 
can determine the nature of men so exactly 
as to foresee their course of conduct in almost 
all circumstances — that is, if we can say with 
precision, " Such a man of such a temper- 
ament, in such a case, will do this" — it does 
not follow that we are able to determine, one 
by one, all the secret evolutions of his mind, 
which is not ours ; all the mysterious tempta- 
tions of his instincts, which do not resemble 
ours ; nor all the confused proclivities of his 
nature, of which the organs, nerves, blood, and 
flesh are different from ours. 

Whatever be the genius of a feeble, gentle, 
passionless man, loving solely science and 
work, he will never be able to transport him- 
self so completely into the body and soul of a 
man with an exuberant, sensual, and violent 



" The Novel." xxiii 

nature, agitated by every desire and even by 
every vice, as to comprehend and describe 
the inmost impulses and sensations of such 
a different being, even when he can clearly 
foresee and narrate all the acts of his life. 

In brief, the author who produces a work of 
pure psychology can only substitute himself in 
the place of all his personages in the different 
situations where he places them ; for it is 
impossible for him to change his organs, which 
are the sole intermediaries between exterior 
life and ourselves, which force on us their 
perceptions, determine our sensibility, and 
create in us a soul essentially different from 
all those which surround us. Our view, and 
our knowledge of the world acquired by the 
aid of our senses, and our ideas about life can- 
not be partially transferred by us into all 
the personages whose inmost, unknown being 
we claim to be unveiling. It is always our- 
selves whom we exhibit in the form of a king, 
a murderer, a thief, or an honest man, of a 



xxiv "The Novel." 

courtesan, a nun, a young girl, or a market- 
woman ; for we are obliged to state the prob- 
lem to ourselves in these terms : " If I were 
king, murderer, thief, courtesan, nun, young 
girl, or market-woman, what would / do ? 
What would / think ? How would / act ? " 
We can, then, only diversify our personages 
by changing the age, sex, social position, 
and all the circumstances of the life of our 
/, which nature has surrounded with an im- 
pregnable barrier of organs. 

Skill consists in not letting the reader 
recognize this our /, under all the different 
masks which serve to hide it. 

But if, from the sole point of view of com- 
plete accuracy, purely psychological analysis 
is open to question, it can, nevertheless, give 
us as noble works of art as all the other 
methods of working. 

To-day we have the Symbolists. Why 
not ? Their dream as artists is one to be 
respected ; and they offer this particular 



"The Novel." xxv 

interest, that they know and proclaim the 
extreme difficulty of art. 

In fact, one must be very mad, very daring, 
very conceited, or very stupid to write any- 
thing nowadays ! After so many masters of 
such varied dispositions, of such manifold 
genius, what remains to be done that has not 
been done, what can be said that has not 
been said ? Who among us can boast of 
having written a page or a phrase which can- 
not be found, almost identically, somewhere ? 
When we who are so saturated with French 
writings that our whole body gives us the 
impression of being kneaded up with phrases, 
take up a book, do we ever find a line or 
thought which is not familiar, or of which we 
have not had at least a confused presenti- 
ment ? 

The man who seeks only to amuse his 
public by means already known writes with 
confidence, in the candor of his mediocrity, 
works destined to the ignorant, unoccupied 



" The Novel: 



crowd. But those on whom all the ages of 
past literature weigh heavily ; those whom 
nothing satisfies, whom everything disgusts 
because it does not come up to their dreams ; 
those to whom every flower seems to have 
been plucked, to whom their work always 
gives the impression of a useless and common 
labor — they arrive at the opinion that liter- 
ary art is an inconceivable, mysterious thing, 
which some pages of the greatest masters but 
slightly reveal to us. 

Twenty verses, twenty phrases, read to- 
gether, thrill us to the heart as a surprising 
revelation ; but the following verses resemble 
all verses, and the prose that comes next 
resembles all pieces of prose. 

Men of genius, beyond doubt, have not 
this anguish and torture, because they bear 
in themselves an irresistible creative force. 
They do not sit in judgment on themselves. 
The rest of us, who are simply conscien- 
tious and persistent workers, cannot struggle 



"The Novel." xxvii 

against invincible discouragement, except by 
continuity of effort. 

Two men, by their simple and luminous 
teachings, gave me this force of persistent 
effort — Louis Bouilhet and Gustave Flaubert. 

If I speak of them and myself in this place, 
it is because their advice, summed up in a 
few lines, will be useful, perhaps, to some 
young writers less confident in themselves 
than one is ordinarily when we make our 
dt'but in literature. 

Bouilhet, who was the first with whom I 
formed a rather intimate acquaintance, about 
two years before I gained the friendship of 
Flaubert, by dint of repeating to me that a 
hundred verses or even less insured the 
reputation of an artist, if they were faultless, 
and if they embodied the essence of the 
talent and originality of a man even of the 
second order, made me understand that on 
some day of lucidity, power, and enthusiasm, 
by happily meeting with a subject thoroughly 



".The Novel." 



in harmony with all the tendencies of our 
spirit, continual labor and thorough knowl- 
edge of one's trade would make such a work 
start into life — a work short, unique, and as 
perfect as we can make it. 

I perceived in the next place that the 
best-known writers have almost never left 
more than one volume ; and that, before all 
things, it is necessary to have the oppor- 
tunity of finding and discovering, in the 
midst of the multiplicity of matters presented 
to our choice, that which will absorb all 
our faculties, all our work, all our artistic 
power. 

Later on, Flaubert, whom I sometimes saw, 
conceived a liking for me. I ventured to 
submit to him some of my attempts. He 
kindly read them, and replied, " I do not 
know if you have talent ; what you have 
shown me proves that you possess a certain 
degree of intelligence. But do not forget this, 
young man, that talent— to quote the saying 



" The Novel ." 



of Buffon — is merely long patience. Keep 
on working." 

I did so, and often revisited him, as I per- 
ceived that he liked me, for he laughingly 
used to call me his disciple. 

For seven years I wrote verses, I wrote 
stories, I wrote novels, I even wrote a detest- 
able play. Of these nothing survives. The 
master read them all, and then, on the follow- 
ing Sunday at breakfast, he would give me 
his criticism, and inculcate, little by little, two 
or three principles that sum up his long and 
patient lessons. " If one has any originality, 
the first thing requisite is to bring it out ; if 
one has none, the first thing to be done is to 
acquire it." 

Talent is long patience. Everything which 
one desires to express must be looked at 
with sufficient attention, and during a suffi- 
ciently long time, to discover in it some aspect 
which no one has as yet seen or described. 
In everything there is still some spot unex- 



xxx "The Novel r 

plored, because we are accustomed only to 
use our eyes with the recollection of what 
others before us have thought on the subject 
which we contemplate. The smallest object 
contains something unknown. Find it. To 
describe a fire that flames, and a tree on a 
plain, look, keep looking, at that flame and 
that tree till in your eyes they have lost all 
resemblance to any other tree or any other 
fire. 

This is the way to become original. 

Having, besides, laid down this truth, that 
there are not in the whole world two grains 
of sand, two specks, two hands, or two noses 
exactly alike, he compelled me to describe, in 
a few phrases, a being or an object in such 
a manner as to clearly particularize it, and 
to distinguish it from all the other beings or 
all the other objects of the same race or the 
same species. 

" When you pass," he used to say, " a grocer 
seated at his shop-door, a janitor smoking 



"The Novel" xxxi 

his pipe, a stand of hackney coaches, show 
me that grocer and that janitor, their attitude, 
their whole physical appearance, embracing 
likewise, as indicated by the skilfulness of 
the picture, their whole moral nature, so 
that I cannot confound them with any other 
grocer or any other janitor ; make me see, in 
one word, that a certain cab-horse does not 
resemble the fifty others that follow or pre- 
cede it." 

I have stated elsewhere his ideas of style. 
They are closely connected with the theory 
of observation which I have just explained. 

Whatever be the thing one wishes to say, 
there is only one noun to express it, only one 
verb to give it life, only one adjective to 
qualify it. Search, then, till that noun, that 
verb, that adjective, are discovered : never 
be content with " very nearly ; " never have 
recourse to tricks, however happy, or to 
buffooneries of language, to avoid a diffi- 
culty. 



xxxii "The Novel." 

We can interpret and describe the most 
subtile things if we bear in mind the verse of 
Boileau : 

" D'un mot mis en sa place enseigna le pouvoir." 

There is no need of the strange, compli- 
cated, illimitable Chinese vocabulary, which 
is imposed on us to-day under the name of 
artistic writing, in order to fix every shade of 
thought ; but it is necessary to discern, with 
the utmost lucidity, all the modifications of 
the value of a word according to the place it 
occupies. Let us have fewer nouns, verbs, 
and adjectives with almost incomprehensible 
meanings, and more varied phrases, differently 
constructed, ingeniously turned, full of sonor- 
ity and skilful rhythms. Let us endeavor to 
be excellent stylists rather than collectors of 
rare forms. 

It is, in fact, more difficult to handle the 
phrase at pleasure, to make it say everything 
(even that which it does not express), and to 



"The Novel." xxxiii 

fill it with hidden meanings, and with secret 
suggestions which are not formulated, than 
to invent new expressions, or to search in the 
depths of old forgotten books all those which 
have passed out of use, and which, having 
lost all significance, are for us only dead 
words. 

The French language, moreover, is a pure 
stream which the mannerisms of writers have 
never been able, and never will be able, to 
trouble. Every century has thrown into this 
limpid current its fashions, its pretentious 
archaisms, and its affectations, without any of 
these useless attempts and impotent efforts 
floating on its pellucid surface. The nature 
of this language is to be clear, logical, and 
nervous. It refuses to be enfeebled, obscured, 
or corrupted. 

Those who to-day write and describe with- 
out attention to abstract terms, those who 
make the rain or hail fall on the cleanness of 
the window-panes, may, also, fling stones at 



"The Novel r 



the simplicity of their fellow-laborers. They 
may hit, perhaps, the fellow-laborers that 
possess a body, but will never reach simplicity 
which has none. 

Guy de Maupassant. 

La Guillette, Etretat, September, 1887. 



I. 

THE FISHING PARTY. 



" Pshaw!" exclaimed M. Roland abruptly 
after a quarter of an hour's silence, during 
which he had remained motionless, with his 
eyes fixed on the water, and occasionally, by 
a slight movement, feeling the line he had 
dropped down into the sea. 

Madame Roland had been dozing at the 
stern by the side of Madame Rosemilly, who 
had been invited to join the party, but roused 
herself at her husband's exclamation, and 
turning her head toward him, asked : 

" Well, what is it, Gerome ? " 



4 Pierre and Jean. 

He replied in a tone of vexation : 

" Can't get another bite. Since noon I've 
caught nothing. One ought never to go 
fishing with women ; they make us too late 
in starting." 

His two sons, Pierre and Jean, who were 
sitting, one on the starboard, the other on 
the port side, each with a line over his fore- 
finger, began to laugh at the same instant, 
and Jean replied: 

" You are very gallant to our guest, 
papa ! " 

M. Roland was confused, and made his 
excuses. 

" I beg pardon, Madame Rosemilly, but I 
can't help it. I invite ladies because I like 
their company, and then, when I find myself 
on the water, I think of nothing but fish." 

Madame Roland was now wide awake, and 
was gazing with a softened air at the wide 
stretch of cliffs and sea. She murmured : 

"Still you have had good sport." 

Her husband shook his head in negation, 
while he cast a satisfied glance on the basket 
where the fish, captured by the three men, 



The Fishing Party. 5 

were still palpitating vaguely with a low sound 
of sticking scales and quivering fins, weak 
ineffectual struggles, while they opened their 
mouths in the deadly air. 

M. Roland took the hamper between his 




knees and tipped it till the silver flood of creat- 
ures reached the edge, in order to see those 
at the bottom ; the palpitation of their death 
agony grew stronger, and their pungent odor, 
a wholesome stench of the sea, arose from 
the full body of the basket. 

The old fisher inhaled it greedily, as if it 
were the scent of roses, and declared: 



Pierre and Jean. 



" By George ! They are fresh, these fel- 
lows," and then continued : 

" How many did you catch, doctor ? " 

The elder son, Pierre, a man of thirty, with 
black whiskers closely trimmed, but without 
mustache or beard, replied : 

" Not many. Three or four." 

The father turned to the younger son. 

"And you, Jean ? " 

Jean, a tall, light-haired youth, with a full, 
heavy beard, and considerably younger than 
his brother, smiled as he answered : 

"About the same as Pierre. Four or five." 

They always told him the same lies, and 
they delighted the old fellow beyond measure. 

He rolled his line round a thole-pin, and 
crossing his arms announced : 

" I'll never again try to fish in the after- 
noon. After ten o'clock, it is all over. The 
rascals will not bite ; they take a siesta." 

The good man looked at the surrounding 
sea with the satisfied air of a proprietor. 

He had been a jeweller in Paris, but an 
irresistible love of sailing and fishing tore 
him from his counter as soon as he had ac- 



The Fishing Party. 



quired a modest competence. He left Paris 
and betook himself to Havre, where he bought 
a boat and became an amateur sailor. His 
two sons, Pierre and Jean, remained at Paris 
to continue their studies, and came, occasion- 
ally during vacations, to share the amuse- 
ments of their father. 

The elder son, Pierre, five years older than 
Jean, felt on leaving college a vocation suc- 
cessively for various professions. He tried 
half a dozen, one after another, and, quickly 
disgusted with each, plunged at once into 
new hopes. 

Finally medicine tempted him, and he set 
to work with such ardor that he received his 
degree as doctor after a brief course, which 
was shortened by dispensations granted by 
the authorities. He was high spirited, intel- 
ligent, changeable, and tenacious, full of Uto- 
pian and philosophic ideas. 

Jean, as fair as Pierre was dark, as calm 
as his brother was excitable, as sweet tem- 
pered as his brother was sour, had quietly 
studied law, and obtained his diploma at the 
same time that Pierre graduated in medicine. 



Pierre and Jean. 



Both were now taking a holiday with their 
family, and both had formed the project of 
establishing themselves at Havre, if they 
could succeed in doing so satisfactorily. 

Still a vague jealousy — one of those dormant 
jealousies which grow up almost invisibly 
between brothers and sisters, till they mature 
and burst forth on the occasion of a mar- 
riage or of a piece of good luck happening 
to one — kept them on the alert in a state of 
fraternal and inoffensive hostility. They 
certainly loved each other, but they were 
spies on each other. Pierre, who was five 
years old when Jean was born, regarded with 
the dislike of a spoiled little pet, this other 
little pet, which suddenly appeared in the 
arms of his father and mother, and which was 
so caressed and beloved by them. 

Jean had been from childhood a model of 
gentleness, goodness, and even temper ; and 
Pierre gradually became wearied of hearing 
the continual praise of his big brother, for 
to him his gentleness seemed effeminate, his 
goodness silly, and his kindness blind. His 
parents, good, easy people, who dreamed of 



The Fishing Party. 



their sons occupying honorable common- 
place positions, reproached him with his 
indecisions, his enthusiasms, his abortive- 
attempts, his ineffectual impulses toward 
generous ideas arid artistic professions. 

After he had attained manhood, they no 
longer said to him, "Look at Jean, and do 
like him," but whenever he heard, " Jean did 
this, Jean did that," he understood clearly this 
hidden allusion, and the sense of the words. 

Their mother, a good, orderly housewife, 
rather sentimental, was continually appeasing 
the little rivalries that sprang up every day 
between her two big sons, over all the little 
details of domestic life. At this moment her 
peace of mind was disturbed by a trifling 
event which she feared might lead to a com- 
plication. She had during the winter, while 
her sons were completing their special studies, 
made the acquaintance of a neighbor, Ma- 
dame Rosemilly, widow of a ship-captain who 
had died at sea two years before. The young 
widow was quite young, twenty-three years 
old, a woman of capacity, who knew life by 
instinct like a wild animal, as if she had seen, 



Pierre and Jean. 



experienced, comprehended, and weighed all 
possible events, which she judged with a 
sound reason and kindly spirit. She had 
fallen into the habit of coming in the even- 
ing, to do her embroidery or to converse, to 
the house of her neighbors, who kindly offered 
her a cup of tea. 

M. Roland, whose mania for a nautical 
pose gave him no peace, interrogated his 
new friend respecting the deceased captain, 
and she spoke of him, his voyages, his old 
tales, without embarrassment, like a sensible 
woman resigned to her loss, who loves life 
and respects death. 

The sons, on their return, finding this pretty 
widow installed in the house, at once began 
to pay their court to her, less through desire 
to please her than from a longing to sup- 
plant each other. 

Their mother, with her practical common 
sense, hoped that one of them would be suc- 
cessful, for the young widow was rich, but 
she would have been glad that the other 
should not feel annoyed. 

Madame Rosemilly was a blonde, with blue 



The Fishing Party. u 

eyes, a crown of fluffy hair that fluttered in 
the slightest breeze, and a daring, resolute, 
combative air, which by no means was in har- 
mony with the prudent circumspection of her 
disposition. 

She already seemed to prefer Jean, attracted 
to him by a similarity of character. This 
preference, however, was only shown by an 
almost imperceptible difference in voice and 
look, and by the fact that she sometimes took 
his advice. 

She seemed to divine that Jean would for- 
tify her own opinion, while that of Pierre 
would be certainly different. When she 
spoke about the doctor's ideas in politics, 
art, philosophy or morals, she would occa- 
sionally say "Your nonsense." Then he 
would look at her with the cold stare of a 
lawyer who held an indictment against all 
women, those poor creatures. 

Before the return of his sons, M. Roland 
had never invited her to his fishing parties ; 
nor, indeed, did he take his wife on these 
excursions, for he wanted to embark at day- 
break with Captain Beausire, an old skipper 



12 Pierre and Jean. 

whom he had met at high-water on the 
quay, and whose intimate friend he had 
become, and by the old sailor Papagris, 
commonly called Jean Bart, who was the 
boat-keeper. 

One evening in the preceding week, Ma- 
dame Rosemilly, who had dined with them, 
observed, " Fishing must be amusing, is it 
not ? " and the retired jeweller, flattered in 
his ruling passion, and possessed with a de- 
sire to disseminate it and make believers as 
priests do, exclaimed : 

" Will you come with us ? " 

" Oh, yes." 

"Next Tuesday?" 

"Yes, next Tuesday." 

" Have you the courage to start at five in 
the morning ?" 

"Oh, no, no, certainly." 

He was disappointed and chilled, and 
began to doubt of her vocation. Neverthe- 
less, he asked : 

"At what hour can you start ? " 

" Well— at nine ! " 

" Not before ? " 



The Fishing Party. 



13 



" No, not before. That is too soon ! " 
M. Roland hesitated. It was certain that 
nothing would be caught, for when the sun 
is warm the fish do not bite ; but the two 




brothers hastened to arrange the party, and 
organize everything before the session ad- 
journed. 

On the following Tuesday, then, the Pearl 
dropped her anchor beneath the white rocks 
of the cape of La Heve ; they fished till noon, 



14 Pierre and Jean. 

then dozed, then fished without taking any- 
thing, and Roland, discovering somewhat late 
in the day that Madame Rosemilly really 
cared for nothing but the sail, and seeing that 
there was no sign of a nibble at his lines, 
uttered, in an access of unreasoning impa- 
tience, that energetic "Pshaw!" which was 
addressed as much to the widow who was 
so indifferent as to the fish that would not 
be caught. 

He was at present engaged in gazing on the 
captured fish, his fish, with the trembling joy 
of a miser ; then he looked to the sky and 
remarked that the sun was sinking. 

" Well, boys," he said, " shall we go back 
a bit ? " 

The sons both drew in their lines, rolled 
them up, cleaned their hooks and stuck them 
into their corks, and then waited. 

M. Roland stood up to look at the horizon 
in sea- faring style. 

" No more wind," he said; " we must row, 
my lads." 

Then, with his arm pointing to the north, 
he added : 



The Fishing Party. 15 



" Look there, the Southampton boat." 

The smooth sea lay stretched out like a 
piece of blue stuff, boundless, gleaming with 
reflections of gold and fire, and away in the 
direction indicated a blackish cloud ascended 
against the rosy sky. Below it was seen the 
ship, which at such a distance seemed quite 
small. Southward were numerous other clouds 
of smoke, all tending toward the jetty of 
Havre, the white line of which was scarcely 
visible, with the lighthouse erect as a horn at 
the end. 

Roland asked: 

" Does not the Normandie arrive to-day ? " 

Jean replied : 

" Yes, papa." 

"Give me my glass. I believe she is down 
there." 

He pulled out the copper tube, adjusted 
the instrument to his eye. and then, delighted 
with seeing her, exclaimed : 

" Yes, yes, it is the Normandie; 1 recognize 
her two smokestacks ! Will you have a look, 
Madame Rosemilly ? " 

She took the glass and turned it toward 



1 6 Pierre and Jean. 

the distant American steamer, doubtless with- 
out bringing it into the field, for she dis- 
tinguished nothing but some blue with a 
circle of color, a round rainbow, and then 
strange objects, like a kind of eclipses, which 
made her feel quite sick. 

She returned the glass with the words : 

" I never could use that instrument. It used 
to put my husband in a bad temper, for he 
would remain for hours at the window watch- 
ing the ships pass." 

M. Roland was vexed as he replied : 

" It must be the fault of your eyes, for my 
glass is a very good one." 

Then he offered it to his wife. 

" Will you take a look ? " 

" No, thanks ; I know beforehand I can- 
not." 

Madame Roland, a woman of forty-eight 
years, but who did not show them, seemed to 
enjoy more than the others the sail and the 
close of the day. 

Her chestnut hair had just commenced 
to whiten. She had a calm, thoughtful air — 
a happy, kindly air pleasant to see. Accord- 



The Fishing Party. 17 



ing to a remark of her son Pierre, she knew 
the price of money, which did not prevent 
her from enjoying the charm of revery. She 
loved to read romances and poetry, not for 
their value as works of art, but for the ten- 
der and melancholy dreaminess they awoke 
in her. A verse, often commonplace, often 
had, set the little string in vibration, as she 
said, and gave her the feeling of a mysterious 
desire almost realized. She felt a pleasure, 
too, in these light emotions that somewhat 
troubled her soul, which was as well kept as 
an account book. 

Since her arrival at Havre she had become 
visibly stouter, and this rendered heavy a 
figure which had once been slender and 
supple. 

This excursion on the water had charmed 
her. Her husband, without being bad na- 
tured, bullied her without anger and without 
dislike, in the bullying tone of the despots of 
the counter for whom an order is equivalent 
to a curse. In the presence of strangers he 
restrained himself, but in his family he gave 
way and assumed terrible airs, although he 
2 



1 8 Pierre and Jean. 

was afraid of everybody. She, in her dislike 
of noise, scenes, and useless explanations, 
always yielded and never asked for anything ; 
she had not dared even ask, for a long time 
back, to join in a sail. It was with joy then 
that she seized this occasion, and tasted this 
rare and novel pleasure. 

After they had left the shore, she aban- 
doned herself utterly, body and soul, to the 
gentle gliding over the water. She did not 
think, she did not roam among her recollec- 
tions or her hopes ; it seemed to her that her 
heart, like her body, was floating over some- 
thing soft, fluid, delicious, which rocked her 
into apathy. 

When the father gave the order, " Come to 
your places for rowing," she smiled as she 
saw her two big sons take off their jackets, 
and roll up their shirt-sleeves on their bare 
arms. 

Pierre, who was nearest the two ladies, took 
the starboard oar, Jean that on the larboard 
side, and they waited till the master cried, 
" Oars all ! " for he stickled about having 
these manoeuvres executed according to ride. 



The Fishing Party. 19 

Then at one dash, they let fall the oars, 
and swung back with all their force, and a 
rivalry in displaying their vigor began. They 
had gone out gently with sails set, but the 
breeze had fallen, and the masculine pride of 
the two brothers was at once aroused at the 
prospect of measuring their strength against 
each other. 

Whenever they went fishing with their 
father alone, they rowed without a cox- 
swain, for Roland prepared the lines while 
watching the progress of the skiff, which he 
guided by a word or gesture. " Easy, Jean." 
" Now, Pierre, slash it through," or perhaps he 
said, "Now one, now two, more elbow grease." 
Then the sluggard pulled stronger, and the 
toiler took it more easily, till the boat's course 
was straight. 

To - day they resolved to display their 
biceps. The arms of Pierre were hairy, 
rather thin but nervous ; those of Jean, 
plump and white, rather pink, with a mass of 
muscles that played beneath the skin. 

Pierre had the advantage at first. With 
teeth set, brow wrinkled, legs stretched, hands 



20 Pierre and Jean. 

clinched on the oar, he made it bend at 
every stroke, and the Pearl swerved aside. 
M. Roland, sitting in the bow to leave the 
sternsheets to the ladies, roared out, " Easy, 
number one ; pull, number tiuo." 1 Then num- 
ber one redoubled his fury, and two could 
not reply to his disorderly stroke. 

At length, the captain gave the word 
" Stop." The two oars rose together, and 
Jean, by his father's orders, pulled a few 
strokes by himself. But from this time the 
advantage was his ; he grew animated and 
heated, while Pierre, panting and exhausted 
by his rash struggle, grew weak and out of 
breath. Four times had M. Roland to stop 
in order to give the elder time to recover 
his wind, and to get the skiff on her course. 
The doctor, with his brow sweating, and his 
cheeks pale, vexed and humiliated, stam- 
mered out : 

" I do not know what has seized me. I 
have a spasm at the heart. I started in very 
well, and that has strained my arm." 

Jean asked, " Would you like me to take 
both oars ? " 



The Fishing Party. 



'* No, thanks. It will soon pass." 

Madame Roland, in a tone of annoyance, 
said : 

" Now, Pierre, what is the sense of putting 
yourself into such a state ? You are not a 
baby now." 

He shrugged his shoulders and began 
again to row. 

Madame Rosemilly pretended not to see, 
notice, or hear anything. Her little blonde 
head made, at every movement of the boat, a 
pretty swing backwards, which shook the fine 
hair on her temples. 

But M. Roland cried, " Halloo, there's 
the Prince Albert overtaking us ! " They 
all looked at it. Long, low, with its two 
smoke-stacks sloping astern, and its two 
yellow paddle-boxes, like round cheeks, the 
Southampton steamer came on at full speed, 
her deck covered with passengers and open 
parasols ; her paddles with noisy rapidity 
striking the water, that fell back in foam, 
gave her an air of haste, the air of a 
hard-pressed messenger, while her upright 
stem cut the sea into two swelling waves 



22 Pierre and Jean. 

which glided, thin and transparent, along her 
sides. 

When she was quite near the Pearl, M. 
Roland lifted his hat, the two ladies waved 
their handkerchiefs, and the salutation was 
answered by half a dozen parasols waved 
from the steamer as she passed on, leaving 
behind her, on the tranquil and gleaming 
surface of the sea, a few gentle undulations. 

Other ships came into view, hooded with 
smoke, hastening from all points of the com- 
pass to the short white jetty, which swal- 
lowed them up like a mouth, one after the 
other. Fishing-boats and large sailing-ships, 
with their tracery of masts gliding against the 
sky, in tow of invisible tugs, all came, slowly 
or speedily, to that devouring ogre, which at 
intervals seemed, in over-gorged satiety, to 
vomit out to the sea another fleet of packet- 
ships, brigs, schooners, and three-masters, 
with their tangled network of ropes and 
spars. The steamers sped on, right or left, 
over the smooth bosom of the ocean, while 
the sailing-ships, cast off by the tugs that had 
hauled them out, remained motionless, spread- 



The Fishing Party. 23 

ing, from mainsail to royals, their white or 
brown canvas, which seemed red in the 
setting sun. 

Madame Roland, her eyes half closed, 
murmured : 

" How beautiful the sea is ! " 

Madame Rosemilly replied, with a pro- 
longed sigh, which, however, had no sadness 
in it : 

" Yes, but it does plenty of mischief some- 
times." 

Roland exclaimed : 

" There's the Normandie going into port. 
Is not she a big one ? " 

Then he told all about the coast before 
them, from the other side of the mouth of 
the Seine — twenty kilometres wide, that 
mouth — he said. He pointed out Villerville, 
Trouville, Houlgate, Luc, Arromanches, the 
river of Caen, and the rocks of Calvados, 
which render navigation dangerous as far as 
Cherbourg. Then he discussed the sand- 
banks of the Seine, which shift every tide, 
and mislead even the pilots of Quillebceuf if 
they do not examine the channel every day. 



24 Pierre and Jean. 

He bade them remark that Havre separated 
Upper and Lower Normandy. In Lower 
Normandy the coast sinks into pasture-lands, 
meadows, and fields down to the water's edge. 
The coast of Upper Normandy, on the other 
hand, was steep, with huge cliffs, indented 
and sheer, that made as far as Dunkirk an 
immense white wall, where every break in 
the line held a village or a port, — Etretat, 
Fecamp, Saint Valery, T report, Dieppe, and 
so on. 

The two ladies, in apathetic contentment, 
and moved by the sight of the ocean covered 
with ships that came and went like beasts 
around their den, were not listening ; they did 
not speak, for they were somewhat crushed 
by the vast expanse of air and water, and 
rendered silent by the calmful magnificence 
of the sunset. Roland alone never stopped 
talking ; he was one of those whom nothing 
affects. Women, more nervous, sometimes 
feel that the sound of a useless voice is as 
irritating as an impertinence. 

Pierre and Jean, once more calmed down, 
rowed on slowly, and the Pearl advanced to 




LANDING FROM THE Pearl. 



The Fishing Party. 27 



the harbor, looking diminutive by the side 
of the large ships. 

When she touched the quay, the sailor 
Papagris, who was waiting for them, took the 
hand of the ladies to assist their landing, and 
the party entered the town. A numerous, 
peaceful crowd, the crowd that goes every 
day to the jetty at high water, was likewise 
returning. 

Mesdames Roland and Rosemilly led the 
way, followed by the three men. As they 
went up the Rue de Paris, they paused oc- 
casionally before a milliner's or goldsmith's 
shop to look at a hat or a trinket, and, after 
an exchange of ideas, resumed their walk. 

Before the Place de la Bourse, Roland, as 
he did every day, looked at the basin du 
Commerce, which was filled with ships and 
prolonged by other basins, where the large 
hulls, with their sides touching, lay four or 
five deep. The countless masts along the 
many miles extent of quays, the masts with 
their yards, their vanes, and their ropes, gave 
to this opening in the middle of the town the 
aspect of a huge dead forest. Above this 



28 Pierre and Jean. 

leafless wood the gulls were circling, watch- 
ing for all the refuse cast in the water, and 
dropping on it like a falling stone. A cabin- 
boy, who was fixing a block at the end of a 
peak, looked as if he had climbed up to seek 
for nests. 

" Will you waive all ceremony and dine 
with us, to finish the day together ? " said 
Madame Roland to Madame Rosemilly. 

" Yes, with pleasure. I accept without 
ceremony. It would be melancholy to go 
home alone this evening." 

Pierre, who had heard the remark, and 
whom the indifference of the young widow 
began to annoy, muttered, " Humph! the 
widow is putting on airs now." For some 
days he had called her the " widow." The 
word, inexpressive as it was, irritated Jean 
simply by the tone, which seemed to him ill- 
natured and injurious. 

The three men did not say a word more 
till they reached their dwelling. It was a 
narrow house, composed of basement and 
two stories, in the Rue Belle-Normandie. 
The servant, Josephine, a lass of about nine- 



The Fishing Party. 29 



teen, a country girl at low wages, who had 
in excess the startled, animal look of the 
peasantry, opened the door, closed it after 
them, and followed her master to the recep- 
tion-room on the first floor. Then she said: 

" A gent's been here three times." 

M. Roland, who never spoke to her with- 
out bawling and cursing, cried out : 

" Who is it that's been here ? doggone it ! " 

She was not disturbed at any time by these 
bursts of clamor from her master, and con- 
tinued: 

" A gent from the notary." 

"What notary ?" 

"Well, M. Canu." 

" And what did the gentleman say ?" 

" That M. Canu would come himself this 
evening." 

M. Lecanu was the notary, and, to some 
degree, the friend of Roland, whose business 
he transacted. For him to announce a visit 
in the evening, argued some urgent and im- 
portant affair. The Rolands looked at each 
other, on this intelligence, with the anxious 
feeling which seizes persons of moderate 



30 Pierre and Jean. 

means at every intervention of a notary, who 
awakes a host of ideas about contracts, lega- 
cies, lawsuits, and other things agreeable or 
disagreeable. After some seconds, Roland 
murmured: 

" What can this mean ? " 

Madame Rosemilly began to laugh. 

" Why, it is a legacy, I'm sure. I bring 
good luck." 

They were not, however, expecting the 
death of any one who was likely to leave them 
anything. 

Madame Roland, blessed with an excellent 
memory for pedigrees, at once began to recall 
to mind all the marriages on her own and her 
husband's sides, and trace out the descend- 
ants and cousins in their various branches. 

She asked, even before taking off her hat : 

" Tell me, father " (she called her husband 
" father " at home, and sometimes " Mon- 
sieur Roland " before strangers), " tell me, 
father, do you remember whom Joseph Lebru 
married when he married the second time ? " 

" Yes, a little Dumenil, daughter of a paper- 
maker." 



The Fishing Party. 31 



" Has he any children ? " 

" Four or five, at the least, I believe." 

" No ; nothing from that quarter." 

She was already eager in this inquiry, and 
clung to this prospect of a little competence 
falling to them from the sky. But Pierre, 
who loved his mother dearly, who knew her 
to be a bit of a dreamer, and feared a slight 
disappointment, a slight vexation, if her illu- 
sions were shattered, and if the news, instead 
of being good, turned out bad, checked 
her. 

"Do not bother yourself, mamma; there 
are no more American uncles. For my part, 
I should sooner believe that it is about a 
marriage for Jean." 

All were surprised at the idea, and Jean 
was somewhat annoyed that his brother 
should have spoken of such a thing before 
Madame Rosemilly. 

" Why for me rather than you ? Your sup- 
position is very disputable. You are the old- 
est : a marriage for you would be the first to 
be thought of. And then, as for me. I do 
not want to marry." 



32 Pierre and Jean. 

Pierre grinned. 

" Are you in love, then ? " 

The other, displeased, replied : 

" Must one be in love to say that one does 
not want to marry yet ? " 

" Good. The ' yet ' explains all. You are 
waiting." 

" Grant that I am waiting, if you like." 

M. Roland, who had listened and reflected, 
all at once found the most probable solution. 

" By Jove, we are all stupid to rack our 
brains thus. M. Lecanu is a friend of ours. 
He knows that Pierre is looking for a doc- 
tor's office, and Jean for a lawyer's office : he 
has found how to place one of you." 

This was so simple and probable that every- 
body agreed. 

" Dinner is ready," said the servant-girl. 
All went to their rooms to wash their hands 
before sitting down to table. 

Ten minutes later they were seated in the 
little dining-room on the ground floor. 

They did not talk much at first, but after 
a few minutes Roland once more expressed 
his surprise at this visit of the notary. 



The Fishing Party. 33 

" In brief, why did he not write ? Why 
did he send his clerk three times ? Why is 
he coming himself ? " 

Pierre thought this quite natural. 

" He wants an immediate answer, and per- 
haps he lias to communicate some confiden- 
tial clauses which one is not fond of putting 
in writing." 

They remained, however, preoccupied, and 
somewhat out of sorts at having asked the 
stranger, Madame Rosemilly, who spoiled 
their conversation as to the resolutions to be 
taken. 

They had just ascended to the reception- 
room when the notary was announced. 

Roland rushed to meet him. 

" Good-day, dear Master." 

He used as a title for M. Lecanu the word 
" Master," which precedes the name of all 
notaries. 

Madame Rosemilly rose. 

" I shall take my leave. I am very tired." 

They feebly attempted to detain her, but 
she did not consent, and went without any of 
the three gentlemen escorting her as usual. 
3 



34 Pierre and Jean. 



Madame Roland paid great attention to 
the new-comer. 

" A cup of coffee, M. Lecanu ? " 

" No, thanks. I have just risen from 
table." 

" A cup of tea, then ?" 

" I will not say no, but in a little while. 
We must first talk business." 

In the profound silence which followed 
these words nothing but the rhythmical tick- 
ing of the clock was heard, and the noise 
from the lower story of the dishes being 
washed by the girl, who was too stupid to 
listen at keyholes. 

The notary began. 

" Did you know at Paris a certain M. 
Marechal, — Leon Marechal ?" 

M. and Madame Roland uttered the 
same exclamation, " Of course I did." 

" He was one of your friends ? " 

Roland declared : 

" Our best, sir ; but madly fond of Paris. 
He never quitted the boulevard. He was 
chief clerk in the finance bureau. I never 
saw him after I left the capital. And then 



The Fishing Party. 35 

we ceased to write to each other. You know 
when one lives far apart — " 

The notary continued gravely : 

" M. Marechal is dead." 

Husband and wife made together that 
slight movement of sorrowful surprise, true 
or feigned, with which such news is received. 

M. Lecanu continued : 

" My colleague in Paris has just commu- 
nicated to me the chief clause of his will, by 
which he makes your son Jean, M. Jean 
Roland, his sole legatee." 

The astonishment created was so great that 
no one had a word to say. 

Madame Roland was the first to master 
her emotion, and stammered out: 

" My God ! Poor Leon — our poor friend. 
My God, my God ! Dead." 

Tears glistened in her eyes, those silent 
tears of women, drops of grief that spring 
from the soul and fall over the cheek, and 
seem so sad because they are so clear. 

Roland, however, thought less of the sad- 
ness of the loss than of the hope held out. 
Still he dared not immediately ask about the 



Pierre and Tean. 



clauses of the will, or the amount of the for- 
tune ; but, to approach to the interesting 
question, asked : 

"Of what did poor Marechal die?" 

M. Lecanu was completely ignorant. 

" I only know," he said, " that, dying with- 
out direct heirs, he leaves all his fortune, 
twenty thousand francs per annum in the 
three per cents, to your second son, whom he 
saw born and grow up, and whom he deemed 
deserving of this legacy. In default of the 
legacy being accepted by M. Jean, the prop- 
erty will go to the orphan asylum." 

M. Roland could no longer conceal his joy, 
and cried : 

" That's a noble idea. If I had had no 
offspring, I certainly would not have forgot- 
ten him either — my dear friend." 

The notary smiled. 

" I have been very much gratified," he said, 
" at announcing the matter personally. It is 
always a pleasure to bring people good news." 

He did not give a thought to the fact that 
this good news was the death of a friend, of 
the best friend of M. Roland, who himself 



The Fishing Party. 37 



had suddenly forgotten the intimacy which 
he had just proclaimed with such convic- 
tion. 

Madame Roland and her sons alone pre- 
served a sorrowful countenance. She con- 
tinued to weep a little all the time, and to 
wipe her eyes with her handkerchief, which 
she then raised to her lips to check her 
heavy sighs. 

The doctor, in low tones, observed : 

" He was a good fellow, very kindly dis- 
posed. He often asked us to dinner, my 
brother and me." 

Jean, his large eyes open and sparkling, 
with a gesture habitual to him, took his beau- 
tiful beard in his right hand, and made it 
slide through his fingers as if to lengthen and 
thin it. 

He opened his lips twice to utter some 
suitable phrase, and, having looked for one 
a long time, found only this : 

" He was very fond of me, indeed, and 
embraced me always when I went to see 
him." 

But the father's thoughts were galloping, 



3 8 Pierre and Jean. 

galloping about the legacy, just announced, 
and already acquired, about this money hid- 
den behind the door, which would come in 
at once, to-morrow, as soon as the words " I 
accept " were uttered. 

He asked : 

" There is no possible difficulty ? no suit ? 
no contest ? " 

M. Lecanu was quite at his ease. 

" My colleague in Paris describes the situa- 
tion as completely plain. We only want M. 
Jean to accept." 

" Good, then ; and the fortune is quite 
clear ? " 

" Quite clear." 

" All formalities have been gone through ? " 

"All." 

Suddenly the old jeweller felt a touch of 
shame — a vague, instinctive, transitory shame 
— at his haste in assuring himself, and con- 
tinued : 

" You understand, of course, that if I ask 
you all these things immediately, it is to 
spare my son annoyances which he might 
not foresee. Sometimes there are debts, 



The Fishing Parly. 39 



some embarrassments, how do I know ? And 
then one is in a thorny labyrinth. In fine, I 
am not the legatee, but 1 think of the little 
one before all." 

In the home-circle, Jean was always called 
" the little one," although he was much taller 
than Pierre. 

Madame Roland suddenly seemed to come 
out of a dream, to recall something far off, 
almost forgotten, which she had heard at 
some time and was not sure of, and she 
stammered out : 

" Did you not say that our poor friend 
Marechal had left his fortune to my little 
Jean ? " 

" Yes, madame." 

She replied simply : 

" It gives me great pleasure, for it proves 
that he loved us." 

Roland rose. 

" Do you wish, dear sir, that my son sign 
at once the deed of acceptation ? " 

" No — no, M. Roland. To-morrow — to- 
morrow, at my office at two o'clock, if that 
suits you." 



4o Pierre and Jean. 

"Yes — yes; certainly." 

Then Madame Roland, who had also risen, 
and was smiling after her tears, took two 
steps toward the notary, laid her hand on the 
back of his arm-chair, and, gazing on him 
with the tender look of a grateful mother, 
asked : 

" The cup of tea, M. Lecanu ? " 

" At present, gladly, madame, with pleas- 
ure." 

The servant was called, and brought in 
first those dry crackers in deep tin boxes, — 
those insipid and distressing English biscuits 
that seemed cooked for parrot bills, and 
soldered in metal cases for voyages round 
the world. She then went for some un- 
bleached napkins, folded in little squares, — 
those tea napkins which are never washed in 
thrifty families. She came in a third time 
with the sugar-bowl and the cups ; then she 
went out to boil the water. 

The company waited. 

No one could speak : they all had too 
much to think of and nothing to say. Ma- 
dame Roland alone made some commonplace 




THE READING OF THE WILL. 



The Fishing Party. 43 



remarks. She told about the fishing party, 
and praised the Pearl and Madame Rose- 
milly. 

" Charming, charming woman ! " replied 
the notary. 

Roland, his back leaning against the mar- 
ble chimney-piece as in winter when the fire 
was burning, his hands in his pockets, his 
lips puckered up as if to whistle, could not 
keep still, as he was tortured with an imperi- 
ous desire to give vent to all his joy. 

The two brothers, in two similar arm- 
chairs, their legs crossed in the same fashion, 
right and left of the central round table, 
looked straight before them in similar atti- 
tudes, that were filled with different expres- 
sions. 

The tea appeared at last. The notary 
took, sugared, and drank his tea, after crum- 
bling into it a little cracker too hard to 
bite. Then he rose, shook hands, and left. 

" It is agreed," repeated Roland, " to-mor- 
row at your office, two o'clock." 

" So it is agreed ; to-morrow, two o'clock." 

lean had not said a word. 



44 Pie?- re and Jean. 

After the departure of the notary there 
was again silence, till father Roland clapped 
his two open hands on the two shoulders of 
his younger son, and exclaimed : 

" Well, you deuced lucky dog, don't you 
embrace me ? " 

Jean smiled and embraced his father, say- 
ing : 

" That does not seem to me indispen- 
sable." 

But the father could not restrain himself, 
for joy. He walked about, played the piano 
on the furniture with clumsy fingers, pirou- 
etted on his heels, and repeated : 

" What luck ! what luck ! Here's luck 
indeed ! " 

Pierre asked : 

" You knew Marechal well, then, at one 
time ? " 

His father replied : 

" By Jove, he passed all his evenings at our 
house. You must remember that he went 
on holidays to get you at the college, and 
often took you back again after dinner. 
Why, the very day when Jean was born, it 



The Fishing Party. 45 



was he who went to bring the doctor ! He 
had breakfasted with us when your mother 
found herself ill. We knew at once what 
was the matter, and off he went at a run. 
In his hurry he took my hat instead of his 
own. I remember that, because we laughed 
a good deal about it afterwards. It is even 
likely he remembered this circumstance when 
he was dying, and, as he had no heir, said to 
himself : ' I aided at the little fellow's birth ; 
well, I'll leave him my fortune' " 

Madame Roland, buried in a deep easy- 
chair, seemed lost in memories. She mur- 
mured as if she were thinking aloud : 

" Ah, he was a noble friend, devoted, 
faithful ; a rare man, as times are now." 

Jean rose. " I am going to take a bit of a 
walk," he said. 

His father was surprised, and wished to 
detain him, for they had to talk, to make 
plans, to form resolutions. But the young 
man was obstinate, alleging an appointment. 
Besides, there would be plenty of time to come 
to an understanding before the legacy came 
into his possession. 



46 Pierre and Jean. 

He went away, for he longed to be alone, 
in order to reflect. Pierre, in his turn, said 
he was going out, and some minutes later 
followed his brother. 

When Roland was alone with his wife he 
took her in his arms, kissed her half a score 
of times on each cheek, and, in reply to a 
reproach she often had made to him, said : 

" You see, my darling, that it would have 
been no good for me to stay longer in Paris, 
and work myself to death for the children, 
in place of coming here to recover my health, 
since a fortune has dropped to us out of the 
clouds." 

She became very serious. 

" It falls from the clouds for Jean," she 
said — " but Pierre ? " 

" Pierre ! why, he's a doctor, he will make 
— money — and then his brother will do some- 
thing for him." 

" No. He would not take anything. Be- 
sides, the legacy is for Jean, nobody but Jean. 
Pierre, you see, finds himself at great disad- 
vantage." 

Poor Roland seemed perplexed. 



The Fishing Party. 47 

" Then, we will leave him something more 
in our will." 

" No. That would not be just, either," 
she cried out. 

" Ah, well, then, eh ? What do you want 
me to do ? You are always looking out for 
a lot of unpleasant ideas. You spoil all 
my pleasures. I'm off to bed. Good- night. 
All the same, it is a stroke of good luck, right 
down good luck ! " 

He went his way, enchanted in spite of 
everything, and without a word of regret for 
the friend who died so generously. 

Madame Roland began again to dream 
in front of the lamp in which the wick was 
smoking. 



THE JEALOUS BROTHERS. 



II. 



As soon as he was out of doors, Pierre 
turned his steps toward the Rue de Paris, 
Havre's principal thoroughfare — well-lighted, 
animated, and noisy. The rather fresh breeze 
coming from the sea played about his face, 
while he walked slowly, his cane under his 
arm, and his hands behind his back. 

Somehow he felt ill at ease — dull, dis- 
appointed, like one who has heard bad news. 
This unpleasant impression had not been 
formulated into thought, and had he been 
suddenly called upon he would have been 



52 Pierre and Jean. 

puzzled to have told the cause of this heavi- 
ness of spirit, this torpor of body. He was 
out of sorts — suffering from an uneasy feel- 
ing he could not locate. He had within him 
somewhere a slight sense of discomfort — 
a scarcely Perceptible moral bruise that he 
could not place his finger upon, but which, 
nevertheless, annoyed, fatigued, saddened, 
and irritated him ; an unnamed and trifling 
trouble, a mere foreboding of sorrow. 

Arrived at the Place du Theatre, he felt 
attracted by the lights of the Cafe Tortoni, 
and slowly sauntered up to the illuminated 
facade ; but just as he was about entering, 
he reflected that he might encounter friends 
and acquaintances — people with whom he 
would be compelled to converse — and a sud- 
den repugnance for this commonplace, vin- 
ous good-fellowship took possession of him. 
Then, retracing his steps, he again followed 
the main thoroughfare in the direction of the 
harbor. 

He asked himself, " Where shall I go ? " 
seeking some place that would prove agree- 
able to him in his present frame of mind. 



The Jealous Brothers. 53 



He did not find any, since he felt annoyed 
when alone, and still did not wish to meet 
any one. 

On reaching the principal quay he hesi- 




tated a moment and then turned toward the 
pier : he had decided in favor of solitude. 

As he passed near a bench on the break- 
water, he stopped and sat down, tired of 
walking and already out of conceit with his 
proposed promenade. 



54 Pierre and Jean. 



Again he asked himself, " What is the 
matter with me this evening ? " and set to 
work to recollect what disappointment he 
had met with, much as one interrogates a 
patient to determine the cause of his fever. 

He was in a peculiar frame of mind, at 
once excited and thoughtful — one moment 
being in a labyrinth of confused impressions, 
the next in the full possession of his logical 
powers, approving or chiding his successive 
mental phases ; but, in the end, the original 
turbulent emotions always gained the upper 
hand — the man of feeling dominating the 
man of intellect. 

Then he sought to discover the origin of 
his temporary weakness ; of the necessity he 
felt to keep moving without having any end 
in view ; of the desire to meet some one who 
might combat his opinions, and at the same 
time of the disinclination for the society of 
those he might see, and his distaste for what 
they might say to him. 

At last he put this question to himself : 
" Could it have been Jean's inheritance ?" 
Yes, that might, after all, have been the 



The Jealous Brothers. 55 



cause of his discomfort. When the notary 
had brought the news, he had felt his heart 
beat a little faster than usual. Surely, we 
are not always masters of ourselves, but are 
subject to spontaneous and persistent emo- 
tions against which we struggle in vain. 

He reflected deeply over this physiological 
problem— the impression produced by an 
occurrence on the Instinctive Being, and 
creating within one a current of ideas and 
sensations, joyful or painful, the opposite of 
what the Thinking Being desires, demands, 
or considers good and wholesome — the Think- 
ing Being, which is its superior through the 
cultivation of the intellect. 

He tried to picture to himself the state of 
mind of the son who inherits a large fortune, 
and who is about to test many longed-for 
pleasures, but hitherto forbidden by a father's 
narrow income — a father beloved and pitied. 

He rose and walked toward the end of the 
pier. He already felt better, glad to have 
understood — to have surprised himself, as it 
were, and unveiled the other personality that 
is within us. 



56 Pierre and Jean. 

"So I was jealous of Jean," he thought; 
"certainly a sufficiently unworthy sentiment. 
I am sure of it now, for the first thought 
that came into my head related to his mar- 
riage with Madame Rosemilly. I don't fancy 
that goose of a reasonable woman, who seems 
made to disgust one with sound sense and 
goodness. Thus it is uncalled - for envy — 
its very essence — that which is because it is ! 
It must be looked after." 

He had reached the signal -mast that indi- 
cates the depth of water in the harbor, and 
lit a match in order to read the list of ships 
that had been signalled outside, and were 
waiting to come in with the next tide. Steam- 
ers were expected from Brazil, La Plata, 
Chili, and Japan, besides two Danish brigs, a 
Norwegian schooner, and a Turkish steamer. 
This latter announcement surprised Pierre as 
much as if he had read of a Swiss steamer, 
and caused him to conjure up the vision of 
a large vessel swarming with men in turbans, 
who sprang up the rigging in wide trousers. 

" But how stupid of me," he thought ; 
" the Turks are a seafaring people." 



The Jealous Brothers. 5 7 



A few steps farther on he stopped to view 
the roadstead. On his right, above Sainte 
Adresse, the two electric lighthouses of Cape 
de la Heve, like two monstrous twin Cyclopes, 
cast across the water their prolonged and 
powerful glances. Starting from these two 
adjoining foci, two parallel rays — resembling 
the giant tails of two comets — fell in a straight 
line of extraordinary length, from the summit 
of the hill to the edge of the horizon. Then 
on the two piers, two other lights — the chil- 
dren of these Colossi — marked the entrance 
to the harbor ; while beyond, across the 
Seine, could be seen still others, fixed and 
flashing, with brilliant effulgence and dark 
eclipses, opening and closing like eyes — the 
eyes of harbors, yellow, red, green, watch- 
ing over the dark sea covered with ships ; 
living eyes of the hospitable shore, saying, 
by the simple mechanical movement of their 
lids : 

" It is I ; I am Trouville ; I, Honfleur ; I, 
the river of Pont Audemer." 

And overlooking all the others, so high up 
and so far off that it could easily be mis- 



58 Pierre and Jean. 



taken for a planet, the aerial lighthouse of 
Etouville, lighting the way to Rouen across 
the sandbanks at the mouth of the great 
river. 

Then on the deep, boundless sea, darker 
than the heavens, here and there stars seemed 
visible. They trembled in the nocturnal 
mist — small, near and distant, and also white, 
red, or' green ; generally they were motionless, 
but some seemed to move. They were the 
lights on vessels at anchor that were waiting 
for the coming tide, or on those still in mo- 
tion that were seeking an anchorage. 

Just then the moon rose behind the town. 
It, too, looked like some huge, celestial 
beacon, placed in the heavens to guide the 
immeasurable flotilla of stars. 

Pierre said to himself, almost aloud : 

" And still we allow ourselves to be an- 
noyed by trifles." 

Suddenly, quite near him, into the wide, 
black opening between the two piers, a 
shadow — a huge, fantastic shadow — glided. 
Leaning over the granite parapet, he saw a 
fishing-boat that was coming in without hum 




PIERRE ON THE JETTY. 



The Tealous Brothers. 61 

of voices, sound of waves, or splashing of 
oars, gently propelled by its tall brown sail 
filled with the breeze that came from the 
open bay. 

" If one could live down there," he thought, 
" perhaps one might be at rest." 

Then, having advanced a few steps farther, 
he saw a man seated at the end of the 
mole. 

A dreamer, a lover, a sage, a happy man, 
or an unhappy one ? Which was he ? He 
came nearer, curious to see the face of this 
solitary watcher. In a second he had recog- 
nized his brother. 

" What ! Is it you, Jean ? " 

" What ! Pierre ? What are you doing 
here ? " 

" Getting a breath of fresh air. And you ? " 

Jean began to laugh. 

" I am following your example." 

And Pierre sat down by the side of his 
brother. 

" How beautiful ! " 

" Yes." 

From the tone of his voice Pierre under- 



62 Pierre and Jean. 

stood that Jean had not been looking at 
what was around him. He continued : 

' b When I come here I have ungovernable 
cravings to go away with these ships — to the 
north or to the south. Only to think that 
those lights yonder come from every quarter 
of the globe — from the lands with gigantic 
flowers and beautiful pale, or copper-colored 
girls ; the lands of humming-birds, elephants, 
unchained lions, negro kings ; from all the 
lands that furnish fairy tales for those of us 
who no longer believe in the ' White Cat ' 
or the ' Sleeping Beauty in the Wood ! 
Wouldn't it be splendid to be able to treat 
one's self to a journey there ? But that would 
take money, and a good deal of it — 

He stopped suddenly, all at once remem- 
bering that Ids brother now had the necessary 
means, and that, liberated from every care — 
from daily toil — free without trammels of any 
kind, happy, joyous, he could go where fancy 
might dictate, toward the home of Swedish 
blondes or of Havanese brunettes. 

Then one of those involuntary thoughts, 
common with him, so sudden, so rapid, that 



The Jealous Brothers. 63 

they could neither be foreseen, checked, nor 
modified, came to him as from the mind of 
a second, independent and powerful person- 
ality. 

" Bah ! he is stupid, and will marry the 
little Rosemilly." 

He had risen to his feet. 

"I leave you to dream of your future; I 
feel the need of exercise." 

He pressed his brother's hand, and con- 
tinued in cordial tones : 

" Well, little Jean, you are now wealthy. I 
am glad that I met you alone to-night, since 
it lias afforded me an opportunity to tell 
you what real pleasure it has given me, to 
say how heartily I congratulate you, and how 
much 1 love you." 

" Thanks, thanks, my good Pierre, thanks ! " 
stammered Jean, gentle and sympathetic by 
nature, greatly moved. 

And Pierre turned backward, sauntering 
slowly, his cane under his arm, and his hands 
behind his back. When he had reached the 
town he again asked himself what he should 
do, not satisfied at having his walk cut short, 



64 Pierre and /can. 

at having been turned away from the direc- 
tion of the sea by the presence of his brother. 

Suddenly an idea came to him. 

"I'll go drink a glass of liqueur at Pere 
Marowsko's," and he turned back toward 
the Ingouville quarter. 

He had known Pere Marowsko in the 
hospitals at Paris. He was an old Pole — 
some said a political refugee who had had 
exciting adventures, and who had come to 
France, where he had passed additional ex- 
aminations, to carry on business as a drug- 
gist. Nothing was certainly known of his 
past career, although various legends had 
found currency among the in and out door 
students at the hospitals, and later among 
his neighbors. His reputation as a formi- 
dable conspirator, a Nihilist, a regicide, a 
patriot ready for any enterprise, had proved 
attractive to the vivid imagination of Pierre 
Roland, and he had become the friend of 
the old Pole, without, however, having ob- 
tained from him any details regarding his 
life. It was owing to the young physician 
that the old man had come to Havre to 



The Jealous Brothers. 65 

establish himself in business, relying upon 
the patronage that the former had promised 
to bring him. 

In the mean time he lived economically in 
his little shop, selling remedies to the small 
dealers and working-people of the neighbor- 
hood. 

Pierre often dropped in to see him after 
dinner and have an hour's chat, for he had 
taken a fancy to Marowsko's calm face and 
infrequent observations ; the long pauses, in 
his opinion, indicating much profound reflec- 
tion. 

A single gas-jet burned over a counter 
filled with phials. Those in the window had 
not yet been lighted, from motives of econ- 
omy. Behind the counter, seated on one 
chair while his feet rested on another, a bald- 
headed old man, with a large, beak- like nose 
that, continuing the facial line from his bare 
head, made him resemble a parrot, was fast 
asleep with his chin resting on his breast. 

At the sound of the shop-bell he awoke, 
rose, and on recognizing the doctor, came for- 
ward to greet him with outstretched hands. 
5 



66 Pierre and Jean. 

His black coat, spotted with stains of acids 
and sirups, and much too large for his small, 
lean frame, somewhat resembled an ancient 
cassock. Marowsko spoke with a strong 
Polish accent, that gave to his weak voice a 
lisping, childish character, and intonations 
like those of an infant just beginning to talk. 

Pierre sat down. 

" What's the news, my dear doctor ? " 
asked the Pole. 

" Nothing ; the same old story ! " 

" You don't seem lively this evening." 

" No, I'm not often so." 

" Come, come ! You must rouse yourself. 
What do you say to a glass of liqueur ? " 

" Thanks ; I should be glad to have one." 

" Well, then, I shall astonish you with a 
new preparation. For two months I've been 
trying to make something out of currants, 
from which thus far we have nothing but the 
sirup. I — well, I've found it — I've found it 
— a good liqueur, very good ! " 

And, beaming all over, he went to a closet, 
which he opened, and took out a phial. He 
moved about in an undecided way, with 



The Jealous Brothers. 67 

short, incomplete gestures — never fully ex- 
tending his arms or his legs, or making an 
entire motion. His ideas seemed to be mod- 
elled on his movements. He suggested, indi- 
cated, sketched them, but never went the 
length of stating them. 

His principal business in life seemed to 
be the preparation of liqueurs and sirups. 
" With a good sirup or a good liqueur, one 
can make a fortune," was a frequent remark 
of his ; and he had invented hundreds of 
sweet concoctions, without being able to place 
a single one of them on the market. Pierre 
declared that Marowsko made him think of 
Marat. 

Two small glasses were brought from the 
back room and placed on the preparation 
counter. Then the two men examined the 
color of the new liquid by holding it up to 
the light. 

" Beautiful ruby ! " was Pierre's verdict. 

" Isn't it ?" 

And the old parrot-like face was wreathed 
in smiles. 

The doctor tasted the precious cordial, 



68 Pierre and Jean. 

held it in his mouth, pondered, tasted again, 
again reflected, and at last spoke : 

" Good, very good, and with a decidedly 
original flavor. A genuine find, my dear 
sir." 

"Yes, I am quite satisfied." 

Then the old man consulted his visitor as 
to how the new liqueur should be named. 
He thought of calling it " Essence de Gro- 
seille," * or, rather, " Fine Groseille," or 
" Groselia," or " Groseline." 

Pierre was not satisfied with either of these. 
Marowsko then had an idea. 

" What you said just now is good, very 
good — ■' Beautiful ruby. 

The doctor argued against the appropri- 
ateness of the title, although it was his own 
invention, and advised strongly in favor of 
" Groseillette," which Marowsko thought 
admirable. 

Then he lapsed into silence, and remained 
for several minutes seated under the single 
gas-jet without saying a word. 

- "Groseille " being French for " currant." 



The Jealous Brothers. 



69 



" Something strange happened to us this 
evening," said Pierre at last, almost in spite 
of himself. " One of my father's friends has 
died, and left his fortune to my brother." 

The druggist did not at first seem to un- 
derstand, but, after reflection, hoped that the 





— 


"• ;J|ij * 




' if: 




1' 
1 






' 



doctor would get half. When the affair had 
been fully explained, he seemed surprised 
and vexed, and as an expression of his dis- 
satisfaction at seeing his young friend sacri- 
ficed, he kept repeating : 

" It will not have a good effect." 
Pierre, whose lassitude was again getting 
the upper hand of him, wanted to know what 



7<d Pierre and Jean. 

the old man meant. What evil could come 
from his brother's having inherited a fortune 
from a friend of the family ? But the worthy 
man, circumspect in his day and generation, 
would not explain. 

" In such a case, it is usual to leave to 
both brothers equally. I tell you it will not 
have a good effect." 

And the doctor, out of patience, went 
away, returned to the paternal roof, and 
retired for the night. 

For some time he could hear Jean softly 
walking up and down the adjoining room ; 
then he slept, after having drunk two glasses 
of water. 



THE FAMILY DINNER. 



III. 

The doctor awoke next day with a settled 
determination to make his fortune. 

He had already come to this decision sev- 
eral times before, but without acting upon it. 
At the outset of all his attempts to enter 
upon a new career, the hope of becoming 
suddenly wealthy had buoyed him up and 
kept him in heart until he had encountered 
the first obstacles, which would at once turn 
him in some new direction. 

Cosily ensconced in his warm bed, he 
meditated. How many physicians had be- 



74 Pierre and Jean. 

come millionnaires in less than no time ! All 
that was needed was a grain of savoir 
/a/re, for, in the course of his studies, he 
had gauged the most celebrated professors 
of the healing art and set them down as 
ninnies. Surely he was as clever as they, if 
not more so ! If he could manage in some 
way to capture the patronage of the wealthy 
and fashionable in Havre, he would be able 
to make 100,000 frs. a year easily. And he 
ran over items of this imposing income. In 
the morning he would call on his patients. 
Taking the very lowest average, he would 
make ten visits a day, which, at 20 frs. 
each, would give him 72,000 frs. a year, or 
more probably 75,000 frs., since he would 
be certain to be called to see more than ten 
patients. In the afternoon he would devote 
himself to office practice ; and, if he only re- 
ceived ten visits at ten francs, he would have 
36,000 frs. at the end of the year. Thus he 
would have an income of 120,000 frs., in 
round numbers. Former patrons and friends 
whom he would call on for ten francs a visit, 
and for whom he would prescribe at his 



The Family Dinner. 75 

office for five francs, might slightly diminish 
this total ; but this again would be made up 
by consultations with other physicians and 
the numerous petty perquisites of the pro- 
fession. 

Nothing easier than to reach this point by 
dint of skilful if indirect advertising — the 
insertion of paragraphs in the Figaro call- 
ing attention to the fact that the whole body 
of Paris savants had their eyes fixed on him, 
and were deeply interested in the surprising 
cures performed by the young and modest 
physician of Havre. He would be richer 
than his brother — richer and celebrated — 
and satisfied with himself, for he would be 
the architect of his own fortune, and would 
prove generous to his aged parents, who 
would be justly proud of his renown. He 
would not marry, not caring to embarrass 
himself with one exacting woman ; but he 
would have intimate friends among the pretti- 
est of his women patrons. 

By this time he felt so sure of success that 
he sprang out of bed as if intent on at once 
clutching it, and dressed himself in order to 



76 Pierre and Jean. 

hasten out and search for a suite of rooms 
that would suit him. 

Then, rambling about the streets, he thought 
how insignificant are the trifles that some- 
times affect our most important actions. 
For three weeks he had been hesitating about 
taking some decided step, when this course 
suddenly occurs to him — doubtless as a con- 
sequence of his brother's having received a 
legacy. 

He stopped before the doors by the side 
of which were written announcements of 
"beautiful" or "luxurious" apartments, or 
of "apartments" pure and simple, the latter 
only inspiring his contempt. Then he in- 
spected several with much hauteur, measured 
the height of ceilings, sketched on his memo- 
randum book the arrangement of the rooms, 
made a minute as to how they communicated, 
and the exits, announcing that he was a 
physician and received many visits. The 
staircase must be large and well kept ; he 
could not go higher up than one flight. 

After taking seven or eight addresses and 
scribbling down a mass of information, he 



The Family Dinner. 77 

returned to breakfast a quarter of an hour 
late. 

In the vestibule he heard the rattling of 
dishes. Could they have begun without him ? 
Why ? Meals were never very punctual in 
that household. He felt hurt and dissatis- 
fied, as he was a little sensitive. As soon as 
he entered the room his father said to him : 

" Come, Pierre, make haste ! You know 
we are going to the notary's at two. This 
is not the day for dawdling." 

The doctor sat down without replying, 
after having kissed his mother and pressed 
the hands of his father and brother. He 
then took from the dish in the centre of the 
table the cutlet that had been left for him. 
It was cold and dry. It was also probably 
the poorest. He thought that it might have 
been left in the oven until his arrival, and 
that they should not have so completely for- 
gotten the other son — the eldest. The con- 
versation that had been interrupted by his 
entrance was continued. 

" As for me," said Madame Roland to Jean, 
" this is what I should do, and at once. I 



78 Pierre and Jean. 

should take showy apartments — something 
striking ; I would go into society, buy a 
horse, and select one or two interesting cases 
to plead, thus securing a foothold at the Pal- 
ace. I would seek to be a kind of amateur 
advocate, who would be much sought after. 
Thank Heaven ! you are beyond the reach of 
want, and if you follow a profession, it will be 
in order not to lose the fruits of your studies, 
and because no man should remain idle." 
Pere Roland, who was peeling a pear, said : 
" Cristi! In your place I should buy a 
fine craft — a cutter, built on the model of 
our pilot boats — and should sail as far as 
Senegal." 

Pierre, in his turn, gave an opinion. It 
was to the effect that a man's intellectual 
or moral worth did not depend on his for- 
tune. To those of only moderate intelligence 
money was too often the cause of their degra- 
dation, while in the hands of the strong it 
was a powerful lever. The latter, however, 
were rare. If Jean was really a man above 
the average, he would now be able to give 
proof of it, since he found himself beyond the 



The Family Dinner. 79 

reach of misfortune. But he would have to 
work a hundred times harder than he would 
have been called upon to do under ordinary 
circumstances. It was not a question of 
pleading for, or against, the widow and or- 
phan, and of pocketing a certain number of 
crowns for a case won, or lost ; but of becom- 
ing an eminent jurist — a legal luminary ! 

And he added in conclusion : 

" If I had money, I should carve with it — 
cut up dead bodies ! " 

Pere Roland shrugged his shoulders : 

" Tra, la, la ! The wisest thing to do with 
life is to let it glide gently along. We are 
not beasts of burden, but men. When one 
is born to poverty, one must work — and, so 
much the worse, one works ; but when one 
has an income, one would be a ninny to 
injure his constitution unnecessarily." 

" Our tendencies are not the same," replied 
Pierre with dignity. " As for me, all that 
I respect in the world is knowledge and intel- 
lect — everything else is contemptible." 

As Madame Roland always endeavored to 
break the force of the collisions that were 



80 Pierre and Jean. 

constantly occurring between father and son, 
on the present occasion she turned the drift 
of the conversation by referring to a murder 
that had been committed the week previous 
at Bolbec-Hointot. The attention of the 
family was soon occupied by the details of 
the tragedy, their atrocity, and the attractive 
mystery inseparable from even vulgar, scan- 
dalous, and loathsome crimes — a mystery that 
exercises a strange and fascinating power 
over the imagination. 

Pere Roland, however, frequently consulted 
his watch. 

" Come," he said, " it is time to be going." 

" It is not one yet," was Pierre's sarcastic 
comment. " As there is an abundance of 
time, it was scarcely worth while to give me 
a cold cutlet to eat." 

" Are you coming to the notary's with 
us ?" asked his mother. 

" What should I do there ? My presence 
is entirely unnecessary." 

Tean remained as silent as if he were in 
no way interested in the matter. When the 
Bolbec murder had been discussed, he had 



The Family Dinner. 



laid down certain legal principles, and made 
certain points regarding crimes and criminals. 
Now he had relapsed into silence ; but the 
brilliancy of his eyes, his red cheeks, and 
even the glistening of his beard seemed to 
proclaim his happiness. 

After the family had set out, Pierre, find- 
ing himself again alone, continued his morn- 
ing's search among the furnished apartments. 
After two or three hours of ascending and 
descending stairs, he finally discovered, on 
the Boulevard Francois I., something really 
desirable — a large entresol with doors open- 
ing on two different streets, two salons, a 
glass-covered gallery where patients, while 
waiting, might stroll about among the flow- 
ers, and a delicious dining-room built like a 
rotunda, and looking out on the sea. 

Just as he was about taking it, the rent — 
three thousand francs — made him hesitate, as 
the first quarter must be paid in advance, and 
he had nothing in the way of an income — 
not even a sou. 

The small fortune that his father had been 
able to put aside did not yield quite eight 
6 



82 Pierre and Jean. 



thousand francs a year, and Pierre had 
often reproached himself for having caused 
his parents embarrassment by his indecision 
regarding his choice of a profession, his in- 
variably abandoned experiments, and his con- 
tinual taking up of new studies. He there- 
fore let the matter stand, promising a decision 
in two days. Meantime it occurred to him 
that he might ask his brother to advance the 
money for the first three or even six months — 
fifteen hundred francs — as soon as the latter 
should come into possession of his legacy. 

" That would only be a few months' loan 
at the longest," he thought. " I should prob- 
ably repay it even before the end of the year. 
Nothing would be more natural, and he would 
be glad to be able to accommodate me." 

As it was not yet four o'clock, and he had 
nothing, absolutely nothing to do, he saun- 
tered into the Jardin Public and sat down. 
There he remained on his bench, not even 
giving himself the trouble to think, his eyes 
fixed on the ground, the prey of a feeling of 
lassitude that was fast developing into real 
pain. 



The Family Dinner. 83 

Still lie had passed all the preceding days 
in this way since his return to the paternal 
roof, without suffering as he was now doing 
from the void in his life and from inaction. 




How had he been able to pass the hours from 
the time he rose until bedtime ? 

He had lounged on the pier when the tide 
came in, lounged on the streets, lounged in the 
cafes, lounged at Marowsko's, lounged every- 
where. And now this kind of life, that had 



84 Pierre and Jean. 

seemed tolerable enough up to the present 
time, had become hateful to him. If he had 
had money he would have taken a carriage 
and gone on a long drive in the country by 
the side of the farm boundaries shaded by 
beeches and oaks ; but he was forced to 
count the price of a glass of beer or a post- 
age-stamp, and such extravagance was not 
within his means. It suddenly occurred to 
him how hard it was, when a man is past 
thirty, to be obliged from time to time to 
blushingly ask his mother for a louis, and 
he muttered to himself as he scratched the 
gravel with his cane : 

" Cristi ! if I only had money." 

And the thought of his brother's legacy 
again came to him like the sting of a wasp ; 
but he dismissed it impatiently, not wishing 
to surrender himself to envy. 

Children were playing around him in the 
dust of the paths. They had long, light 
hair, and carefully constructed imposing 
mountains of sand, only to tumble them 
down, as soon as made, with a kick of the 
foot. 



The Family Dinner. 85 

Pierre had fallen upon one of those de- 
pressing days when one searches all the cor- 
ners of one's soul and shakes out all the 
folds. 

"Our own tasks," he reflected, "resemble 
the industry of these youngsters." Then he 
asked himself whether it were not the wisest 
course in life to beget two or three of these 
little, useless beings, and watch them grow up 
with a pleased curiosity. And the desire to 
marry came to him. One would at least 
hear some one moving about in the hours of 
trouble and uncertainty ; it is something to 
be able to say " thou " to a woman when one 
is suffering. 

He began to think about women. He 
knew them but slightly, his liaisons in the 
Latin Quarter having seldom lasted more 
than a fortnight, being broken off when the 
month's allowance had been exhausted, and 
continued or replaced by a new one when 
the next remittance arrived. There must, 
however, be kind creatures — very good, very 
gentle, and very consoling. Had not his 
mother brought good sense and simple pleas- 



86 Pierre and Jean. 

ures to his father's fireside ? How he would 
like to meet a woman — a real woman ! 

He rose suddenly with a resolution to call 
on Madame Rosemilly. Then he sat down 
again as suddenly. She was displeasing to 
him. Why ? She had too much good sense 
— vulgar and sordid ; besides, did she not 
appear to prefer Jean ? Without admitting 
it in so many words, this preference counted 
for much in his low estimate of the widow's 
intelligence ; for, although he loved his 
brother, he could not help considering him 
rather commonplace intellectually, and as 
inferior to himself. 

He did not intend, however, to remain 
there until nightfall, and, as on the previous 
evening, he anxiously asked himself, " What 
shall I do?" 

He now felt within him the necessity of 
being petted, embraced, and consoled. But 
consoled for what ? He could not have told; 
but he was passing through one of those 
periods of weakness and lassitude in which 
the presence of a woman, the caresses of a 
woman, the touch of a hand, the grazing of 



The Family Dinner. 87 



a dress, a glance from eyes blue, or black, 
seem suddenly indispensable to our hearts. 

And the recollection came to him of an 
attendant in a wine-shop who had one even- 
ing taken him home, and whom he had seen 
again from time to time. 

He again rose to go and drink a " bock " 
with this girl. What should he say to her ? 
What would she say to him ? Nothing, no 
doubt ; but what did it matter ? He would 
hold her hand a moment. She seemed to 
have taken a fancy to him. Why, then, did 
he not see her oftener ? 

He found her taking a nap on a chair in 
the almost deserted wine-shop. Three cus- 
tomers were smoking their pipes, leaning 
over the oak tables ; the cashier was reading 
a novel ; while the proprietor, in his shirt- 
sleeves, was asleep on the bench. 

As soon as she saw him the girl rose 
quickly and came forward, saying : 

" Good day : how goes it ? " 

"All right ; and you ? " 

" Oh ! very well. What a stranger you 
are ! " 



88 Pierre and Jean. 

" Yes, I have but little time to myself ; 
you know I'm a physician." 

" Yes ? but why didn't you tell me so be- 
fore ? If I had only known it, I would have 
consulted you when I was ailing last week. 
What will you take?" 

" A beer ; and you ? " 

"I'll have one, too, as you pay for it." 

Then, sitting down together, they went on 
talking. Every now and then she would take 
his hand with the easy familiarity of girls 
whose affection is for sale. At last, making 
him the target for her tenderest glances, she 
said : 

" Why don't you come oftener ? I like 
you ever so much, darling." 

But he had already had enough of her, and 
she appeared in his eyes what she really was 
— stupid, common, and smelling of the peo- 
ple. 

" Women," he said to himself, " should 
come to us only in dreams, or surrounded by 
the aureole of luxury, that idealizes their 
vulgarity." 

" You passed here the other morning with 




THE BEER-HOUSE. 



The Family Dinner. 91 

a handsome light-haired gentleman with a 
long beard," she remarked; "was it your 
brother ? " 

"Yes, it was my brother." 

" He is awfully good-looking." 

" You think so ? " 

" Certainly ; and he looks as if he lived 
well." 

What uncontrollable impulse suddenly 
urged Pierre to tell this wine-shop waitress 
of Jean's legacy ? Why did the story, that 
he would have forced back had he been 
alone, come to his lips at that instant, and 
why did he allow it to make its way out from 
between his lips as if he felt compelled to 
relieve his heart, swollen with bitterness, 
before some one ? 

"He's a lucky fellow, my brother," he 
said as he crossed his legs ; " he's just 
fallen heir to an income of twenty thousand 
francs." 

She opened wide her blue, covetous eyes. 

"And who left it to him? His grand- 
mother, or his aunt ? " 

" No, an old friend of my parents." 



92 Pierre and Jean. 

"Only a friend? Impossible. And you 
didn't get anything ? " 

" No ; I scarcely knew him." 

She thought a moment, and then, with a 
peculiar smile, said : 

" Well, your brother is fortunate in having 
friends like that. No wonder he doesn't look 
at all like you." 

His first impulse was to slap her face, with- 
out exactly knowing why ; but he only asked, 
in a constrained way : 

" What do you mean ? " 

" Me ? — oh, nothing," she replied with 
affected ingenuousness ; " only he's luckier 
than you." 

He threw twenty sous on the table, and 
went out. 

Then he kept repeating the phrase : " No 
wonder he doesn't look at all like you." 
What was she thinking of ? What hidden 
meaning lay concealed in these words ? They 
were certainly inspired by malice and spiteful- 
ness. They were insulting. Yes, the girl must 
have thought that Jean was Marechal's son. 

The emotion that this slur on his mother's 



77/i? Family Dinner. 93 

good name aroused in him was so violent, 
that he stopped and looked about for some 
place to sit down. 

He saw another cafe opposite, went in, 
took a chair, and ordered beer. 

He felt his heart beat ; cold chills ran 
over him. Suddenly he remembered what 
Marowsko had said the day before : " It will 
not have a good effect." Had the same 
thought — the same suspicion — -occurred to 
him and to this hussy ? 

Leaning over his beer-glass, he watched the 
white foam rise and melt, while he asked 
himself : 

" Can people really believe a thing like 
that ? " 

The reasons that gave rise to this odious 
hypothesis in the minds of others now ap- 
peared to him, in their order, clear, evident, 
exasperating. That an old bachelor without 
heirs should leave his fortune to the two 
children of a friend — nothing seemed sim- 
pler or more natural ; but when he gave the 
whole of it to one only, no doubt the world 
would at first be surprised, then gossip, and 



94 Pierre and Jeati. 

finally laugh. Why had he not foreseen it ? 
Why had his father not had an inkling of it ? 
Why had his mother not suspected it ? No, 
they were too happy over this unexpected 
windfall ; such a thought would not occur 
to them. Besides, how could these worthy 
people imagine that society would be so cen- 
sorious ? 

But the public, the neighbors, the trades- 
men, all who knew them — would they not 
repeat this odious slander, laugh and jest 
over it, ridiculing his father, and despising 
his mother ? 

And the remark made by the wine-shop 
girl, that Jean was light and he dark, that 
they did not resemble each other either in 
face, gait, figure, or mind, would likewise 
occur to every one. When, therefore, Ro- 
land's son was referred to, people would 
ask : " Which, the real or the false one ? " 

He got up, having decided that his brother 
must be warned— put on his guard against 
the terrible danger that threatened their 
mother's honor. But what would Jean do ? 
The simplest way out of the difficulty would 



The Family Dinner. 95 

be to refuse the legacy, which would then 
go to the poor, and to say to friends and 
acquaintances who had heard of the will, that 
the latter contained objectionable clauses and 
conditions, that would have made Jean not 
an heir, but a trustee. 

< >n his way home, he decided that he 
ought to see his brother alone, so as not to 
be compelled to speak on such a subject 
before his parents. 

As he opened the door he heard the sound 
of voices and laughter in the salon, and on 
entering that apartment he discovered that 
his father had brought back with them 
Madame Rosemilly and Captain Beausire to 
dinner in honor of the joyful occasion. 

Vermouth and absinthe were handed 
around to excite an appetite, and the party 
were already in the best of spirits. Captain 
Beausire, a little roly-poly kind of man, 
whose angles had been rounded off by much 
rolling about on salt water, and whose ideas 
seemed as little angular as his body — like 
pebbles on the beach — who gave the full 
value of the " r " in laughing, seemed to con- 



g6 Pierre and Jean. 

sider life a very good thing to take, and that 
no portion of it should be neglected. 

He clinked glasses with Pere Roland, while 
Jean filled those of the ladies a second time. 

Madame Rosemilly refused, when Captain 
Beausire, who had known her husband, ex- 
claimed : 

" Come, come, madame, bis repetita placent, 
as we say in patois, which signifies : ' Two 
Vermouths can't do one any harm.' Now 
I, since I no longer follow the sea, I give 
myself, every day before dinner, two or three 
of those artificial ' rolls.' I supplement them 
with a little ' pitching ' after the coffee, which 
makes the sea rise during the rest of the 
evening. However, I never go the length of 
raising a ' tempest,' never, never, never, for I 
fear ' shipwreck.' " 

Roland, whose passion for the sea was thus 
flattered by the old sailor, was already red in 
the face and unsteady of gaze, owing to the 
absinthe. He had the pot-belly of the petty 
shopkeeper — a capacious abdomen in which 
all the rest of his body appeared to have been 
absorbed — one of those soft, yielding corpora- 



The funnily Dinner, 



97 



t ions to which men who sit a great deal are 
subject, and who have neither thighs, chest, 
arms, nor neck — all their corporeal belongings 
being apparently heaped up on the seat of 
their chair. 

Beausire, on the contrary, although short 
and stout, was as well-proportioned as an egg, 
and as hard as a ball. 

Madame Roland had not yet finished her 
first glass ; and rosy with happiness, her eyes 
shining, she was lost in the contemplation of 
her son Jetm. 

His cup of enjoyment seemed at length to 
be full. The affair was concluded, the papers 
had been signed, and now he had an income 
of twenty thousand francs. By the way 
in which he laughed, from his speaking 
with fuller, more sonorous tones than was 
his wont, from his more decided manner 
and his greater degree of assurance, it was 
evident that he already had acquired the 
self-poise that money brings. 

Dinner was announced, and as old Roland 
was about to offer his arm to Madame Rose- 
milly, his wife interposed : 



98 Pierre and Jean. 

" No, no, father, to-day everything is for 
Jean." 

The table groaned under unaccustomed 
plenty. Before Jean's plate, who had been 
promoted to his father's place, a huge bou- 
quet with silk favors — such as only grace 
very ceremonious occasions — -rose like a flag- 
decorated dome. On its flanks were four 
fruit dishes, the first of which contained a 
pyramid of superb peaches ; the second, a 
monumental cake filled with whipped cream, 
and covered with bells made of melted sugar 
— a real cathedral ; the third, slices of pine- 
apples in a white sirup ; and the fourth — un- 
heard-of extravagance — black grapes brought 
from the hot countries. 

"Bigre!" said Pierre, seating himself. 
" We seem to be celebrating the occasion of 
Jean le Riche ! " 

After the soup, Madeira was served, and 
everybody began to talk at once. Beausire 
told of a dinner that he had eaten in Saint 
Domingo, at the table of a negro general. 
Pere Roland listened to him, but endeavored 
to get in edgeways a story of his own about a 



The Family Dinner. 99 



certain repast given by one of his friends at 
Meudon, as a consequence of having partaken 
of which every guest had to pay the penalty 
of a fortnight's illness. Madame Rosemilly, 
Jean, and his mother talked over a proposed 
excursion to Saint Jouin, and a breakfast 
there, from which they promised themselves 
much unalloyed pleasure ; while Pierre bit- 
terly regretted not having dined alone, at 
a cheap seaside restaurant, where he would 
have escaped all the noise, laughter, and 
joyful manifestations that were unmanning 
him. 

He reflected as to how he should manage to 
communicate his fears to his brother, and to 
induce him to give up the fortune that he had 
already accepted, that he was even now en- 
joying, and that was exercising its intoxicat- 
ing influence upon him. It would no doubt 
be hard for him, but the necessity was there ; 
lie could not hesitate since their mother's 
good name was at stake. 

The appearance of an enormous mullet 
started Roland off into a series of tales about 
fishing. Beausire matched them with won- 



Pierre and Jean. 



derful adventures at Gaboon, at Sainte Marie, 
in Madagascar, and, particularly, on the 
coasts of China and Japan, where, he de- 
clared, the fish had faces as comical as those 
of the inhabitants. And he described the 
appearance of the former, their great, golden 
eyes, their blue or red bellies, their queer 
fins, like fans, their crescent-shaped tails — 
so vividly and with 30 much humor that his 
hearers laughed until tears stood in their 
eyes. 

Pierre alone seemed incredulous, and mut- 
tered to himself : 

" No wonder that the Normans are called 
the Gascons of the North ! " 

After the fish came a " vol-au-vent," then 
a roast chicken, a salad, kidney beans, and a 
pate of Pithiviers larks. Madame de Rose- 
milly's maid assisted in waiting on the table, 
and the general good humor sensibly in- 
creased with each successive glass of wine. 
When the cork of the first bottle of cham- 
pagne popped, Pere Roland, greatly excited, 
and imitating the sound with his lips, ex- 
claimed : 



The Familx Dinner. 



" I like that better than the sound of a 
pistol." 

Pierre, still more and more out of humor, 
replied with a sneer : 

" Still it may be more dangerous for you." 

Roland, who was about to drink, replaced 
his full glass on the table, and asked : 

" How so ? " 

For some time past he had been complain- 
ing of his health — of torpor, giddiness, and 
certain constant and inexplicable unpleasant 
sensations. The doctor replied : 

" Because the pistol-ball might miss you ; 
but the wine goes straight into your stom- 
ach." 

" And then ? " 

''And then it burns in the stomach, dis- 
organizes the nervous system, renders the 
circulation sluggish, and paves the way for 
apoplexy, with which all men of your tem- 
perament are threatened." 

The fumes of increasing intoxication that 
had gradually been overpowering the ex- 
jeweller were suddenly dispersed as by a gust 
of wind, and he looked at his son with anx- 



Pierre and Jean. 



ious, restless eyes, endeavoring to make out 
whether he was not jesting. 

" Oh, these plaguey doctors ! " exclaimed 
Beausire ; " they're all just alike. You mustn't 
eat, you mustn't drink, or make love, or dance 
round dances ! It is all detrimental to your 
precious health. Well, I've done everything 
they forbid in all parts of the world, wher- 
ever I could, and as often as I could, and I 
don't see that I'm any the worse for it." 

" In the first place, captain," replied Pierre, 
with a touch of sarcasm in his voice, " you're 
stronger than my father ; and, besides, all the 
good livers talk just as you do until the day 

when and they never return to say to 

the prudent medical adviser: 'You were 
right, doctor.' When I see my father do pre- 
cisely what he ought not to do, what is most 
dangerous for him to do, it is only natural 
that I should warn him. A pretty son I 
should be if I did not." 

" Come, Pierre," interrupted Madame Ro- 
land, greatly annoyed, " what is the matter with 
you ? Once can't do him any harm. Think 
what an occasion it is for him — for us all ! 



The Family Dinner. 



You will spoil his pleasure and ours, too. 
You are very ill-natured." 

" Let him do what he wants to," Pierre 
muttered to himself, shrugging his shoulders ; 
" I've warned him." 

But Pere Roland did not drink. He looked 
at his glass full of clear, sparkling wine, whose 
intoxicating essence was coming to the sur- 
face in minute bubbles that were pressing 
eagerly, rapidly upwards, and bursting as 
they reached the air. He looked at it with 
the distrust of the fox that has found a dead 
fowl, but suspects a trap. 

"You think that would do me much 
harm ? " he asked hesitatingly. 

Pierre was touched with a feeling of com- 
punction, and upbraided himself for having 
caused others to suffer for his ill-humor. 

"No, go ahead," he said, " you may drink 
this time ; but don't abuse the privilege, and 
don't make a practice of it." 

Then Pere Roland raised his glass, but 
without having quite decided whether he 
would drink or not. He again looked at it 
in a woebegone fashion, at once desirous 



104 Pierre and Jean. 

and fearful ; then he smelt it, tasted it, 
sipped it, keeping the wine in his mouth, but 
all the time the prey of many an anxious 
thought, distracted by weakness and the 
desire to gratify his palate, and filled with 
regret as soon as the last drop had van- 
ished. 

All at once Pierre met the eye of Madame 
Rosemilly. It was fixed on him— clear, blue, 
penetrating, and stern. He at one divined 
the meaning of the look— the irritation that 
had possessed the simple-minded, straight- 
forward little woman, for her glance said to 
him : 

"You are envious ; that is disgraceful." 

He bent down his head, and went on eat- 
ing. But he was not hungry, and nothing 
pleased him. He was tormented by a desire 
to go away from these people, so that he would 
no longer hear them talking, jesting, and 
laughing. 

Meantime Pere Roland, the fumes of the 
wine having again gone to his head, had 
already forgotten his son's advice, and was 
looking askance at a bottle of champagne, 



The Family Dinner. 105 



still nearly full, that had been left by the 
side of his plate. He dared not touch it, for 
fear of receiving another admonition, and he 
was therefore meditating by what means he 
could gain possession of it without attracting 
Pierre's attention. Finally he decided in 
favor of the most natural course possible. 
He raised the bottle carelessly, stretched 
across the table, and first filled the doctor's 
glass, which happened to be empty ; then he 
made the round of the table, and when he 
came back to his own, he began talking 
very loud, so as to distract the attention 
of the company from what he was doing. 
If he poured a little wine into his glass, 
and it was noticed, every one would have 
declared that it had been done inadver- 
tently. However, no one seemed to notice 
him. 

Pierre, without thinking of what he was 
doing, drank a good deal. Nervous and an- 
noyed, he frequently, but unconsciously, 
raised his long crystal glass to his lips— the 
flute-like goblet in which the transparent 
liquid was bubbling. He let it run slowly 



106 Pierre and Jean. 

down his throat, so as to catch the twang of 
the evaporated gas on his tongue. 

Gradually a pleasant warmth spread over 
his body. Starting from the stomach, from 
which centre it seemed to radiate, it over- 
spread the chest, took possession of the 
limbs, diffused itself throughout his entire 
being, like a tepid, gracious wave bringing 
with it joy and comfort. He already felt 
better, less impatient, less discontented ; even 
his resolution to speak to his brother that 
very evening was weakened — not that he had 
gone so far as to think of abandoning his 
intention, but he was not anxious to disturb 
his newly found serenity. 

At last Beausire rose to propose a toast. 
Having bowed all around, he said : 

" Very gracious ladies and gentlemen : 
We have met to celebrate a happy event in 
the life of one of our friends. It was for- 
merly said that Fortune was blind : I believe 
that she was only short-sighted, or malicious, 
and that she has just purchased an excellent 
pair of marine glasses, which have enabled her 
to make out in the port of Havre the son of 




MADAME ROSEM1LLYS TOAST. 



The Family Dinner. 109 

our gallant comrade Roland, captain of the 
Pearl r 

" Bravos " sprung to all lips, enforced by 
much clapping of hands, and Pere Roland 
was happy. 

After coughing, for he felt husky, and his 
tongue was somewhat unwieldy, he stam- 
mered out these words : 

"Thanks, captain, thanks for myself and 
for my son. I shall never forget your con- 
duct on the present occasion. I drink to 
your wishes." 

His eyes and his nose being both full of 
tears, he sat down, not thinking of anything 
more to say. 

Jean, who was laughing, took the floor : 

" It is I who should thank the devoted, the 
worthy " (here he looked at Madame Rose- 
milly) " friends who have to-day given me this 
touching proof of their affection. But it is 
not by words that I can testify my gratitude. 
I shall prove it to-morrow, every instant of 
my life — always ; for our friendship is not 
of the kind that passes away." 

" Well said, my child ! " murmured his 



Pierre and Jean. 



mother, much affected ; but Beausire ex- 
claimed : 

"Come, Madame Rosemilly, say something 
in behalf of the ladies." 

She raised her glass, and in a gentle voice, 
a little tinged with sadness, she said : 

" I drink to the blessed memory of M. 
Marechal." 

There was a pause for a few seconds — a 
pause for contemplation, as after a prayer. 
Then Beausire, who was handy at compli- 
ments, remarked : 

" It takes the women to do a thing deli- 
cately.' 

Then turning to Pere Roland, he said : 

" But, after all, who was this Marechal ? 
You were very intimate with him, were you 
not ? " 

The old man, somewhat maudlin in his 
cups, began to shed tears, and in disjointed 
sentences explained : 

" A brother — you know — one of those we 
don't meet with any more — we were never 
separated — he dined with us every evening — 
and he paid for our seats at the theatre- — I 



The Family Dinner 



can't say any more than that — than that — than 
that. A friend — a true — true — wasn't he, 
Louise ? " 

" Yes, a faithful friend," replied his wife 
simply. 

Pierre looked at his father and mother, hut, 
as the conversation turned to other subjects, 
he began to drink again. 

As to the rest of the evening he remem- 
bered little or nothing. The company had 
taken coffee, imbibed liqueurs, and laughed 
immoderately at their own jests. He retired 
toward midnight, his mind confused and his 
head heavy, and slept like a log until nine 
the next morning. 




IV. 

WHY WAS JEAN PREFERRED? 



IV. 



This slumber, steeped in champagne and 
chartreuse, without doubt soothed and calmed 
him, for he awoke in a very kindly disposition 
of mind. As he dressed himself he examined, 
weighed, and summed up the emotions of the 
preceding evening, and sought to disentangle 
from them, clearly and completely, the real 
secret causes, the personal causes as well as 
external causes. 

It was, in fact, quite possible that the girl 
in the beer-shop had conceived a vile idea, 
the real idea of a harlot, on learning that only 



1 1 6 Pierre and Jean. 

one of the sons of Roland had received a 
legacy from an unknown person. Have not 
such creatures always such suspicions, without 
the shadow of a motive, about every honest 
woman ? Do they not, whenever they talk, 
insult, calumniate, defame, every woman 
whom they imagine to be beyond reproach ? 
Whenever an unimpeachable character is 
mentioned in their presence, they are an- 
noyed as if they were abused, and cry, " Ah, 
yes, indeed, I know your married women — 
models of propriety. They have more lovers 
than we, only they conceal them because 
they are hypocrites. Oh, yes ; models of pro- 
priety ! " 

Under any other circumstances, he cer- 
tainly would not have listened to, nor even 
supposed possible, such insinuations against 
his poor mother, so good, so simple, so 
worthy. But his soul was troubled by the 
leaven of jealousy fermenting in him. And in 
his over-excited state, on the watch, in spite 
of himself, for anything which might be of 
detriment to his brother, he had perhaps 
attributed to this seller of beer odious mean- 



Why tvas Jean Preferred ? 117 



ings which she did not have. It was possi- 
ble that his imagination alone, the imagina- 
tion which he did not govern and which 
incessantly escaped from his resolutions, was 
straying and roaming in daring and haz- 
ardous cunning in the infinite universe of 
ideas, and bringing thence shameful thoughts, 
never to be avowed, which it hid away in 
him in the depth of his soul, as in some 
unsounded abyss, like something stolen. It 
might be that his imagination alone created 
and invented this horrible doubt. His heart 
assuredly, his own heart, had its secrets ; and 
this wounded heart perhaps had found in this 
abominable doubt a means of depriving his 
brother of the inheritance that he envied. 
He suspected himself, at present ; and, as 
devotees interrogate their conscience, he 
questioned all the mysteries of his thoughts. 

Certainly Madame Rosemilly, limited as 
was her intelligence, had the tact, the keen 
and subtile scent, of women. But this idea 
had never occurred to her, for she drank, in 
perfect sincerity, to the blessed memory of 
M. Marechal. She would not have done so, 



u8 Pierre and Jean. 

if the slightest suspicion had touched her. 
Now, he no longer doubted, his involuntary 
discontent at the fortune that had fallen to 
his brother, and also, assuredly, his religious 
love for his mother, had intensified his scru- 
ples — pious and honorable scruples indeed, 
but exaggerated. 

On arriving at this conclusion, he had a 
feeling of content as at the accomplishment 
of a good action, and he resolved to show 
himself amiable to all the world, and in the 
first place to his father, whose whims, stupid 
assertions, vulgar notions, and too visible 
mediocrity incessantly irritated him. 

He did not come in too late for breakfast, 
and he amused all the family by his wit and 
good-humor. 

His mother, delighted, said to him : 

" Dear Pierre, you do not think what fun 
and wit you have when you like." 

And he talked on, now in epigrams, now 
provoking laughter by his ingenious sketches 
of their friends. Beausire was his butt, and 
at times Madame Rosemilly ; but her he 
treated in a discreet fashion, not too mis- 



Why was Jean Preferred? 119 

chievously. And he thought as he looked at 
his brother : "Stand up for her, then, stupid. 
It is all very well your being rich, but I shall 
eclipse you whenever I choose." 

Over the coffee he said to his father : 

" Are you going to use the Pearl to- 
day ? " 

" No, my boy." 

" Can 1 take her and Jean Bart ? " 

" Oh, yes, whenever you like." 

He bought a good cigar at the first tobac- 
conist he came to, and, with a joyous air, went 
down to the harbor. 

He looked at the clear and luminous sky 
of delicate blue, refreshed and bathed by the 
sea-breeze. 

Papagris, the sailor, called commonly Jean 
Bart, was asleep at the bottom of the boat, 
which it was his duty to have ready for sail- 
ing every day at noon when there was no 
fishing party in the morning. 

" Only ourselves, skipper," cried Pierre, as 
he descended the iron ladder from the quay 
and leaped into the boat. 

" What wind ? " he asked. 



Pierre and Jean. 



" Due east, Master Pierre. We'll have a 
good breeze in the offing." 

He hoisted the foresail, and raised the 
anchor ; and the skiff, unmoored, began to 
glide gently toward the jetty on the calm 
water of the harbor. The light breath of 
wind through the streets struck the top of 
the sail so gently that it was impercepti- 
ble, and the Pearl seemed endowed with a 
life of its own — the life of ships urged on by 
mysterious and hidden force. Pierre took the 
tiller, and, cigar in mouth, his legs stretched 
out on the seat, his eyes half closed under 
the blinding rays of the sun, watched, as they 
were passed in succession, the huge tarred 
timbers of the breakwaters. 

When they came out to the open sea, on 
reaching the point of the north jetty, which 
sheltered them, the freshening breeze touched 
the face and hands of the doctor like a cool 
caress, penetrated into his chest, which he 
inflated with a long breath, to inhale it, and, 
filling the brown sail that bellied out, gave 
the Pearl a list to leeward, and made her 
more lively. 



Why was Jean Preferred! 





Jean Bart quickly hoisted the jib, and its 
triangle, filled with the wind, looked like a 
wing. Then, taking two strides aft, he threw 
loose the driver which was lashed to its 
mast. 

The boat abruptly heeled over, and, as she 
flew on at full speed, there came from the 
side the soft, brisk sound of water bubbling 
and flying away. 

The stem cut the sea like the share of a 
strange plough, and the waves it raised, in 




Pierre and Jean. 



white curves of foam, swelled up and fell 
back just as the heavy brown furrow of the 
fields falls back. 

Every wave they encountered — and they 
were short and close together — gave the Pearl 
a shock from the jibboom to the rudder, 
which quivered in Pierre's hands ; and when 
the wind, for some seconds, blew stronger, 
the water skimmed the gunwale as if it would 
invade the boat. A steam-collier from Liv- 
erpool was at anchor, waiting for the tide ; 
they passed under her stern, and then visited 
the ships in the roadstead, one after the 
other, and then stood farther out a little to 
see the coast unfold. 

For three hours Pierre, in calm and motion- 
less content, went hither and thither on the 
rippling water, steering like some winged 
creature, swift and obedient, this thing of 
wood and canvas that came and went, sub- 
missive to his caprices, at a pressure of his 
hand. 

He was plunged in revery — such revery as 
comes to one on horseback or on a ship's 
deck. He thought of his future, which was 



Why was Jean Preferred? 123 



to be prosperous, and of the pleasure of a 
life of intelligence. To-morrow he would 
ask his brother to lend him, for three months, 
fifteen hundred francs, to start him at once in 
the pretty suite of rooms in the Boulevard 
Francois I. 

The sailor, all at once, said : 

" Here's the fog, Master Pierre. Better 
put about." 

He raised his eyes, and saw in the north a 
gray, profound, and thin shadow, that bathed 
the sky, and covered the sea, and was coming 
toward them like a cloud fallen from on 
high. 

He went about, and with the wind astern 
directed his course to the jetty, followed by 
the driving fog, which gained on him. When 
it reached the Pear/, and enveloped it in its 
imperceptible density, a cold chill ran through 
Pierre's limbs ; and a smoky, mouldy odor, 
the strange odor of sea-fog, made him close his 
mouth, not to taste this damp and icy cloud. 
When the boat reached its accustomed place 
in the port, the whole town was already 
buried in the fine vapor, which, without fall- 



124 Pierre and Jean. 

ing, wet like rain, and spread over the houses 
and streets like an overflowing river. 

Pierre, with his hands and feet chilled, 
made haste home, and flung himself on his 
bed to sleep till dinner-time. When he en- 
tered the dining-room, his mother was saying 
to Jean : 

" The gallery will be charming. We will 
put some flowers there. You'll see. I will 
take on myself to attend to them and renew 
them. When you give a party, it will be a 
fairy scene." 

" What are you speaking about ? " the doc- 
tor asked. 

" A delightful suite of rooms I have just 
rented for your brother — a real treasure, an 
entresol looking on two streets. It contains 
two reception-rooms, a glazed gallery, and a 
little round dining-room, all together quite 
lovely for a bachelor." 

Pierre grew pale. A burst of wrath seized 
his heart. 

" Where is it ? " he said. 

" Boulevard Francois I." 

He doubted no longer, and took his seat, 



Why was Jean Preferred! 125 

so exasperated that he longed to cry out, 
" This is too much ! There is nothing save 
for him ! " 

His mother, radiant with pleasure, contin- 
ued : 

" And, fancy, I got it for two thousand 
eight hundred francs. They asked three 
thousand, but I obtained a reduction of two 
hundred francs, by taking a lease for three, 
six, or nine years. Your brother will be 
admirably settled there. An elegant set of 
rooms is necessary to make a lawyer's fortune. 
It attracts clients, dazzles and keeps them ; 
it inspires them with respect, and lets them 
understand that a man living in such style 
makes them pay dear for his words." 

She was silent for a few seconds, and re- 
sumed : 

" We must find something like it for you, 
but more modest, as you have nothing — still 
very nice, all the same." 

Pierre replied in an indignant tone : " For 
me ! It will be by work and science that 
I shall succeed." 

His mother persisted : 



126 Pierre and Jean. 

" Yes, but I assure you a pretty apartment 
will be of much service, all the same." 

About the middle of the meal, he asked 
abruptly : 

" How did you make the acquaintance of 
Marechal ?" 

M. Roland raised his head, and began to 
examine his recollections. 

" Wait, I do not remember very well. It 
is so long ago. Oh, yes, I know ! Your 
mother made his acquaintance in the shop — 
was not that the way, Louise ? He came to 
order something, and often came back. We 
knew him as a customer before knowing him 
as a friend." 

Pierre, who was eating French beans, and 
sticking the point of his fork into them one 
after the other, as if lie would have spitted 
them, rejoined : 

" At what time did you make his acquaint- 
ance ? " 

Roland again tried to recollect, but, recall- 
ing nothing, appealed to his wife's memory : 

''What year was it, Louise? You cannot 
have forgotten, as you have so good a mem- 




THE JEWELLER S SHOP. 



Why was Jean Preferred? 129 

ory. Let's see. Was it in — in — in '55 or 
'56 ? Just think : you must know better than 
I do." 

She reflected for some time ; then, with a 
steady and tranquil voice, replied : 

" It was in '58. Pierre was then three 
years old. I am certain I make no mis- 
take, for it was the year when the child 
had the scarlet fever, and Marechal, whom 
we then knew but little, was of great assist- 
ance to us." 

Roland exclaimed : 

" True, true, he was wonderfully kind. 
When your mother was worn out with fatigue, 
and I was busy in the shop, he went to the 
druggist's to bring the medicines. He had, 
indeed, a noble heart. And when you were 
well again, you cannot imagine how happy 
he was, and how he kissed you. It was from 
that time that we became great friends." 

Then with abrupt violence this thought 
entered Pierre's mind, like a ball that perfo- 
rates and lacerates : " Since he knew me first, 
was so devoted to me, loved and kissed me 
so fondly ; since I was the cause of the great 
9 



130 Pierre and Jean. 

intimacy with my parents — why did he leave 
all his fortune to my brother and nothing to 
me ? " 

He asked no more questions, and remained 
in a sombre mood of absorption rather than 
of thought, nursing a new, as yet undefined 
disquiet, the secret germ of a new evil. 

He left the house early, and began again 
to roam the streets. They were buried in 
the fog, which rendered the night heavy, 
opaque, and sickening. It might have been 
called a pestilential vapor descended to earth. 
It could be seen streaming past the gas-lights, 
which it seemed momentarily to extinguish. 
The street pavements became slippery, as 
on evenings when verglas coats them, and 
all evil odors seemed to come out of the 
houses — stinks from cellars, from gutters, from 
spouts, from filthy kitchens — and mingle in 
this horrible stench of the reeking mist. 

Pierre, his shoulders rounded, and his 
hands in his pockets, did not wish to remain 
longer out of doors in the cold, and went to 
call on Marowsko. 

The old druggist was still sleeping under 



Why was Jean P referred 1 131 



the gas-light of his store. When he recog- 
nized Pierre, whom he loved with the love of 
a faithful dog, he shook off his torpor, went 
to look for his glasses, and brought out his 
liqueur. 

" Well," asked the doctor, "how are you 
coming on with your liqueur ? " 

The Pole explained that four of the prin- 
cipal cafes of the town had consented to give 
it a trial, and how the Phare de la Cote and 
the Semaphore Havrais would write it up 
in exchange for some pharmaceutical prod- 
ucts tendered to the editors. 

After a long silence, Marowsko asked if 
Jean was really in possession of his fortune, 
and put two or three vague questions further 
on the same subject. His sullen devotion 
to Pierre revolted against this preference. 
Pierre believed he could follow his thoughts ; 
he divined, understood, read them in his 
averted eyes, in the hesitating tone of his 
voice, in the phrases which rose to his lips, 
but which he did not utter, and which he 
would not utter — he so discreet, so timid, so 
cautious. 



132 Pierre and Jean. 

He no longer doubted that the old man 
was thinking : " You ought not to have let 
him accept this legacy, which will cause evil 
reports about your mother." Perhaps he 
even believed that Jean was Marechal's son. 
Certainly he believed it. How could he help 
believing it, as it must appear so probable, so 
truthlike, so evident ? Had not he himself, 
Pierre, her son, been struggling for three days 
with all his force, all the subtle arguments of 
his heart, to deceive his reason ? Was he 
not still struggling against this terrible sus- 
picion ? 

Once more, suddenly, the necessity of being 
alone — to think, to discuss with himself, to 
face boldly, without scruples or feebleness, 
this theory so possible, and yet so monstrous 
— dominated him so forcibly, that he rose 
without even drinking the glass of groseillette, 
shook the astonished druggist by the hand, 
and plunged into the fog of the streets. 

He said to himself, " Why did this man 
Marechal leave all his fortune to Jean ? " 

It was now no lunger jealousy that made 
him ask this ; it was no longer that rather 



Why was Jean Preferred? 133 

mean and natural envy which he knew was 
hid in his bosom, and which he had fought 
against for the last three days : it was the 
dread of something horrible — the dread of 
himself believing that Jean, his brother, was 
the son of that man ! 

No, he did not believe, he could not even 
put to himself so criminal a question. This 
suspicion, however slight, however improb- 
able, must be rejected by him, utterly and 
forever. He must have light and certainty, 
he must have complete assurance in his heart, 
for his mother was all he loved in the world. 

As he wandered alone in the night, he 
would submit his memory and his reason to 
a minute examination, from which truth in all 
its splendor would result. That once done, 
he would think of it no more, never more. 
He would go to sleep. 

He thought : " Let us see. Let us, first 
of all, examine the facts : then I will recall 
all I know of him, his treatment of my 
brother and me ; I will search all the causes 
which could possibly have furnished a motive 
for this preference. He was there when Jean 



134 Pierre and Jean. 



was born ? Yes, but he knew me before that. 
If he had entertained a mute, secret love for 
my mother, he would have preferred me ; for 
it was through me, thanks to my scarlatina, 
that he became the intimate friend of my 
parents. Logically, therefore, he ought to 
have chosen me, to have had a more vivid 
affection for me, unless he felt for my brother 
as he saw him grow up an instinctive attrac- 
tion and predilection." 

Then with a desperate tension of all his 
thought, of all his intellectual power, he re- 
traced his recollections, in order to recon- 
struct, review, recognize, penetrate, this man 
— the man who had passed before his eyes, 
indifferent to his heart, during all his years 
in Paris. 

He felt, however, that walking, the slight 
movement of his steps, somewhat troubled 
his ideas, disarranged their order, weakened 
their reach, and obscured his memory. 

In order to throw on the past and its un- 
known events a keen look from which noth- 
ing could escape, he must remain motionless, 
in some wide and desert spot. He decided 



Why was Jean Prej 'erred? 135 

to go and sit on the jetty as he had done the 
other night. 

As he drew near the harbor, he heard, in 
the direction of the open sea, a melancholy, 
sinister moan, like the bellowing of a bull, 
but longer and more powerful. It was the 
cry of a fog-horn, the cry of ships lost in the 
fog. 

A shudder shook his flesh and wrung his 
heart, such an echo was there in his soul 
and nerves of that cry of distress, which he 
fancied he had uttered himself. Another 
similar voice moaned in its turn, but more in 
the distance ; then close by, the fog-horn ot 
the harbor, in reply to them, rent the night 
with its clamorous tone. 

Pierre walked quickly to the jetty without 
further thought, but satisfied to plunge into 
the lugubrious and bellowing obscurity. 

He sat down at the end of the mole, and 
closed his eyes to avoid the sight of the elec- 
tric lights, veiled in mist, which rendered the 
port accessible by night, and of the red light 
of the light-house on the south jetty, which, 
however, could scarcely be distinguished. 



136 Pierre and Jean. 

Then, half turning round, he put his elbows 
on the granite, and covered his face with his 
hands. 

His mind, without his pronouncing the 
word with his lips, kept repeating, as if to 
summon, evoke, and challenge his ghost, 
" Marechal — Marechal," and in the darkness 
of his closed eyelids he suddenly saw him as 
he had known him — a man of sixty, wearing 
a pointed white beard, with heavy eyebrows 
that were likewise white. He was neither 
tall nor short, had an affable air, soft gray 
eyes, a modest bearing, the look of an honest, 
tender, and simple soul. He called Pierre and 
Jean " my dear children ;" he never appeared 
to prefer one to the other, and asked them 
together to dinner. 

Pierre, with the tenacity of a hound fol- 
lowing a scent that does not lie, began to 
recall the words, the gestures, the tones, the 
looks of this man who had disappeared from 
earth. He recalled him, gradually, quite com- 
plete in his rooms in the Rue Tronchet, where 
he received his brother and himself at table. 

Two maids waited on him, both old, who 



Why was Jean Preferred? \ y, 



for a long time past, doubtless, had learned the 
habit of saying " M. Pierre " and " M. Jean." 

Marechal stretched out both hands to the 
young people, the right to one, the left to the 
other, according as they entered. 

" Good-day, my children," he would say. 
" Have you any news of your father and 
mother ? As for me, they never write me a 
line." 

The conversation went on pleasantly and 
familiarly on common topics. There was 
nothing extraordinary in the man's nature, 
but much amenity, charm, and grace. He 
was certainly a good friend to them — one 
of those good friends of which one seldom 
thinks, because they are known to be sure 
ones. 

Memories now began to pour in upon Pierre. 
Marechal, seeing him sometimes melancholy, 
and guessing at his poverty, had offered and 
lent him money, spontaneously — some hun- 
dreds of francs, perhaps, forgotten by both 
and never repaid. The man, then, always 
loved him, always took an interest in him, 
since he was troubled about his needs. Then 



Pierre and Jean. 



— then — why leave all his fortune to Jean ? 
No ; he had never been visibly more affec- 
tionate to the younger than to the elder, more 
thoughtful for one than the other, less ten- 
der apparently to this one rather than to that. 
Then— then — he must have had a powerful 
and secret reason for giving all to Jean — 
all — and nothing to Pierre. 

The more he thought of it, the more he 
revived the past of late years — the more the 
doctor considered the difference made be- 
tween them improbable and incredible. 

An acute pang, an inexpressible anguish, 
entered his breast, and made his heart flutter 
like a shaken rag. Its springs seemed broken, 
and the blood passed in in streams, tumultu- 
ously shaking and tossing it. 

Then, half aloud, as one speaks in a night- 
mare, he muttered : " I must know, my God, 
I must know ! " 

He went back now still further, to the 
earliest days when his parents lived in Paris. 
But faces escaped him, and this embroiled 
his recollections. He was, above all, anx- 
ious to recall Marechal with — blond, chest- 



Whv was lean Preferred] 139 



nut, or black hair? He could not : the last 
appearance of the man when lie was old had 
effaced the others. He remembered, how- 
ever, that he was slender, that he had a soft 
hand, and often brought flowers, very often 
indeed ; for his father would repeat without 
ceasing : " More bouquets. Why, it is mad- 
ness, my dear fellow ; you will ruin yourself in 
roses." 

Marechal replied : " Let me alone ; it gives 
me great pleasure." 

And suddenly the remembrance of his 
mother's tones, as she smiled and said, 
"Thanks, my friend," crossed his mind, so 
distinct that he thought he heard her. She 
had then pronounced these three words very 
often, as they were so engraved on the mem- 
ory of her son ! 

Marechal, then, used to bring flowers — he 
the rich man, the gentleman, the customer — 
to this little shop-woman, the wife of a small 
jeweller. Was he her lover ? How could he 
have become the friend of these shop-keep- 
ers if he had not been the lover of the wife ? 
He was a man of education and refined 



140 Pierre and Jean. 

mind. How many times he talked to Pierre 
of poetry and poets ! His appreciation of 
writers was not that of an artist, but of a 
commonplace lover of thrilling sentiment. 
The doctor had often smiled at these lan- 
guishing moments, which seemed to him 
rather silly. To-day he understood that this 
sentimental man could never, never, have 
been the friend of his father, who was so 
matter-of-fact, so earthy, so heavy, for whom 
the word poetry had no meaning. 

Marechal, then, young, free, rich, open to 
all tender emotions, entered one day by 
chance a shop, having probably noticed the 
pretty woman behind the counter. He 
bought something, came back, and talked 
day by day more familiarly, buying by his 
frequent purchases the right to take a seat 
there, to smile at the young wife, and shake 
hands with the husband. 

And afterwards — afterwards — O God ! — 
afterwards. 

He had loved and caressed the first child, 
the jeweller's child, till the birth of the sec- 
ond ; then down to his death he had re- 



Why was Jean Preferred! 141 

mained impenetrable ; then, his tomb closed, 
his body decomposed, his name effaced from 
the names of the living, disappeared wholly 
and forever, having nothing more to manage, 
to dread, or to hide, he left all his fortune 
to the second child ! Why ? The man had 
intelligence ; he must have understood and 
foreseen that he might, that he would almost 
infallibly, arouse a supposition that this child 
was his. He would dishonor a woman, then ? 
How could he have acted thus if Jean had 
not been his son ? 

And suddenly a precise, terrible recollec- 
tion crossed Pierre's mind. Marechal was 
fair-haired, fair as Jean. He remembered 
now a little miniature which he had seen in 
Paris on the parlor chimney-piece, once on a 
time, but which had disappeared at present. 
Where was it ? Lost or hidden ? Oh, if he 
could only have possession of it for a second! 
His mother, perhaps, had it in the secret 
drawer where relics of love are locked up. 

His agony at this thought became so poign- 
ant that he groaned aloud — one of those 
brief moans torn out of the throat bv too 



142 Pierre and Jean. 

keen anguish. And then, abruptly, as if it 
heard him, as if it understood his condition 
and replied to him, the fog-horn on the jetty 
howled close to him. Its voice — the voice of 
a supernatural monster, more echoing than 
thunder, a wild, formidable roar, made to 
conquer the voice of the winds and waves — 
spread away in the darkness over the invisible 
sea buried in the fogs. 

Then, through "the mist, near and far, 
similar cries arose again in the night ; terrible 
were these appealing screams from the huge 
blind packet-ships. 

Again all was still. 

Pierre opened his eyes, and stared in sur- 
prise at being there, when he was aroused 
from his nightmare. 

" I am mad," he thought, " I suspect my 
mother." And a flood of love and tender- 
ness, of repentance, prayer, and desolation, 
inundated his heart. His mother ! Knowing 
her as he knew her, how could he suspect 
her ? Was not the soul, the life, of this simple, 
chaste, loyal woman more transparent than 
water ? Any one who saw and knew her could 



Why was Jean Preferred? T4J 



not but judge her beyond suspicion. And 
it was he, her son, who doubted her ! Oh, if 
he could have taken her in his arms at that 
moment, how he would have embraced and 
caressed her ! How he would have knelt to 
her to ask pardon ! 

Could she have deceived his father ? His 
father ! Certainly he was an honest man, 
honorable and upright in his dealings, but his 
soul had never crossed the horizon of his 
shop. How could this woman, very pretty 
once, as he knew, and as could be still seen, 
endowed with a delicate, affectionate, tender 
nature, have accepted as her betrothed, and 
as her husband, a man so different from her- 
self ? 

Why seek ? She had married him as a girl 
marries the lad with money whom her parents 
present to her. They installed themselves at 
once in their store in the Rue Montmartre ; 
and the young woman presiding at the 
counter, animated by the spirit of her new 
home, and by that subtle sacred sense of 
common interest which replaces love and 
even affection in most of the homes of the 



144 Pierre and Jean. 

Parisian traders, had begun to work for the 
expected fortune of the house with all her 
active and refined intelligence. So her life 
had passed, uniform, tranquil, honorable, 
without tenderness. 

Without tenderness ! Could a woman not 
love ? A young pretty woman living at 
Paris, reading books, applauding actors who 
die of passion on the stage, could she pass 
from youth to age without her heart being 
touched, if only once ? He would not believe 
it of any other woman — why should he 
believe it of his mother ? 

Certainly she might have loved like others! 
for why should she be different from others, 
although she was his mother ? 

She had been young, with all the poetic 
weaknesses that trouble the heart of the 
young. Confined and imprisoned in the 
shop by the side of a vulgar husband who 
always talked business, she had dreamed of 
moonlight, of travels, of kisses interchanged 
in the evening shadows. And then one day 
a man had entered, as lovers enter in books, 
and he had spoken as lovers do. 




IN THE NIGHT. 



Why was Jean Preferred? 147 

She had loved him. Why not ? She was 
his mother. Well, was he to be blind and 
stupid to the extent of rejecting evidence 
because his mother was involved ? 

Had she surrendered ? Yes, since the 
man had had no other mistress ; yes, since he 
had remained faithful to her when she was 
distant and old ; yes, since he had left all his 
fortune to his son, to their son ! 

Pierre rose, quivering in such wrath that he 
would have liked to kill some one. His out- 
stretched arm, his open hand, longed to smite, 
to slay, to bruise, to choke ! Whom ? All the 
world — father, brother, the dead man, his 
mother ! 

He started to return home. What would 
he do ? 

As he passed before a little tower near the 
signal pole, the strident scream of the fog- 
horn struck him in the face. His surprise was 
so great that he almost fell, and recoiled to 
the stone parapet. There he sat down, with 
no more strength left, and broken by this 
commotion. 

The steamer which was the first to answer 



Pierre and Jean. 



seemed quite near, and presented itself at the 
entrance, the tide being at high water. 

Pierre turned and saw its red eye dimmed 
by the mist. Then, under the diffused gleam 
of the electric light, a huge black shadow out- 
lined itself between the two jetties. Behind 
him the voice of the tide-waiter, the hoarse 
voice of a retired captain, cried : 

" Ship ahoy ! 

And in the mist, the voice of the pilot 
standing on the bridge, with equal hoarseness, 
replied : 

" Santa Lucia." 

" Where from ? " 

" Italy." 

"What port?" 

" Naples." 

Before his troubled eyes Pierre fancied he 
could see the flame of fire from Vesuvius, 
while at the foot of the volcano the fireflies 
were dancing in the orange groves of Sor- 
rento or Castellamare. How often had he 
dreamed of those familiar names, as if he had 
known the districts ! If he could but go 
away, at once, no matter where, and never 



JVM' 7cas Jean Preferred? 149 



come back, never write, never let it be known 
what had become of him ! But, no ; he 
must return, return to his paternal home, and 
sleep in his bed. 

So much the worse. He would not return, 
he would wait till day. The sounds of the 
fog-horns pleased him. He rose and began to 
march like an officer keeping his watch on 
deck. 

Behind the first one, another enormous 
and mysterious ship approached. It was an 
English ship returning from India. 

He saw many more come in, starting one 
after the other out of the impenetrable dark- 
ness. When the dampness of the fog became 
intolerable, Pierre set off toward the town. 
He was so cold that he entered a sailor's 
drinking place to get some grog, and when 
the hot brandy and pepper burned his palate 
and throat, he felt hope revive in him. 

He had deceived himself, perhaps ? He 
knew right well his own vacillating irration- 
ality. He had deceived himself beyond 
doubt. He had accumulated facts as one 
draws an indictment against an innocent 



i5° 



Pierre and Jean. 



person, whom it is always easy to condemn 
when one wishes to believe him guilty. 
When he had had a sleep, he would think 
quite differently. Then he went home to 
bed, and by force of will ending by slumber^ 
ing. 




MOTHER AND SON. 



V. 



The limbs of the doctor lay torpid for 
scarce an hour or two in the agitation of a 
troubled sleep. When he awoke in the ob- 
scurity of his warm and closed room, he felt, 
even before thought was kindled in him, that 
doleful oppression, that unrest of soul, which 
the annoyance on which we have slept leaves 
in us. It seems as if the misfortune, of which 
the shock had only struck us the evening 
before, had, during our repose, insinuated 
itself into our very flesh, which it tortured 
and wearied like a fever. The remembrance 



154 Pierre and Jean. 



came to him abruptly, and he sat up in his 
bed. 

Then he began again, slowly, one by one, 
all the arguments that had agonized his heart 
on the jetty while the fog-horns were scream- 
ing. The more he thought, the less he 
doubted. He felt himself dragged by his 
logic as by a hand that with strangling grasp 
draws on to intolerable certitude. 

He was thirsty, he was hot, his heart 
throbbed. He rose to open the window and 
breathe fresh air, and when he was up a slight 
noise reached him through the wall. 

Jean was sleeping quietly, and softly breath- 
ing. He could sleep ! He had no forebod- 
ings, he had divined nothing ! A man who 
had known their mother had left him all 
his fortune. He accepted the money, as it 
seemed to him all right and natural. 

He slept, rich and contented, without 
knowing that his brother was panting in suf- 
fering and distress ; and there arose in Pierre 
a rage against this sleeper, so contented and 
careless. 

Yesterday he would have knocked at his 



Mother and Son. 155 



door and entered, and, silting beside the bed, 
would have said to him, startled with his 
sudden awakening : 

"Jean, you ought not to keep this legacy, 
which to-morrow might bring on our mother 
suspicion and dishonor." 

To-day he could not speak ; he could not 
say to Jean that he did not believe him their 
father's son. At present he must guard in 
secret, keep buried in him, the shame he had 
discovered ; he must hide from all the stain 
he had detected, and which no one must dis- 
cover, not even his brother — above all, not 
his brother. 

Little did he think now of empty respect 
for public opinion. He would have liked all 
the world to accuse his mother, provided 
that he — he alone — he knew her to be inno- 
cent. How could he bear to live near her 
every day, and believe, as he saw her, that 
his brother was sprung from the caresses of 
a stranger ? 

How calm and serene she was, neverthe- 
less ! How sure of herself she seemed ! 
Was it possible for a woman like her, with 



156 Pierre and Jean. 

pure soul and upright heart, to fall, dragged 
down by passion, without exhibiting later any 
signs of remorse, or of the memories of her 
troubled conscience ? 

Remorse, remorse ! It must once, in the 
early days, have tortured her; then it was 
effaced as everything is effaced. Certainly 
she had wept for her fault, and by degrees 
had almost forgotten it. Have not all women, 
all, this prodigious faculty of forgetfulness, 
which makes them scarce recognize after a 
few years the man whose lips have kissed 
them again and again ? The kiss strikes like 
lightning, love passes like a tempest ; then 
life once more becomes calm as the sky, and 
begins again as before. Do we remember a 
passing cloud ? 

Pierre could not remain in his room. 
This house, his father's house, crushed him. 
He felt the roof press on his head, and the 
walls stifle him. And, as he was very thirsty, 
he lighted his candle to go and drink a glass 
of fresh water at the kitchen filter, 

He descended two flights ; then, as he as- 
cended with the carafe full, he sat down, in his 



Mother and Son. 157 

night-shirt, on one of the steps of the stairs 
where a current of air was blowing, and drank, 
without a glass, by long gulps, like a runner 
out of breath. When once more he became 
motionless, the silence of the dwelling struck 
him ; then, one by one, he distinguished the 
slightest noises. At first it was the clock in 
the dining-room, and its ticking seemed to 
him to grow louder second by second. Then 
again he heard heavy breathing — the breath- 
ing of an old man, short, painful, and hard — 
his father's beyond question ; and he shrank 
together at the idea, as if it had only just 
leaped forth in him, that these two men, sleep- 
ing in the same house, father and son, were 
nothing to each other ! No tie, not even the 
frailest, united them, and they did not know 
it ! They talked affectionately to each other, 
they embraced each other, they were glad or 
sorry together over the same things, as if the 
same blood ran in their veins. Yet two per- 
sons born at the two extremities of the world 
could not be more alien to each other than 
this father and this son. They believed they 
loved each other, because a lie had grown up 



158 Pierre and Jean. 

between them. It was a lie that produced 
this paternal love and this filial love — a lie 
impossible to expose, and which no one 
should ever know except him, the true son. 

Still, still, if he were mistaken ? How know- 
it ? Yes, a likeness, even a slight one, might 
exist between his father and Jean, one of 
those mysterious likenesses that pass from 
great-grandfather to great-grandson, and show 
that the whole race descends directly from 
one source. It would be an easy thing for 
a medical man like him to recognize it — the 
form of the jaw, the curve of the nose, the 
distance between the eyes, the nature of the 
hair or teeth ; even less than these, a gesture, 
a habit, a trick of manner, a transmitted taste, 
some sign or other cpiite characteristic for a 
trained eye. 

He could recall nothing — no, nothing. 
But he had not looked carefully, he had 
not observed carefully, as he had had no 
reason for tracing out any imperceptible indi- 
cations. 

He rose to reenter his room, and began to 
mount the stairs with slow steps, and ponder- 



Mother and Son. 159 

ing all the time. As he passed before his 
brother's door he stopped short, his hand 
extended to open it. He was seized with an 
imperious desire to see Jean at once, to take 
a long look at him, to surprise him in his 
sleep, while the peaceful face and the relaxed 
lineaments were in repose, and when all the 
artificiality of life had disappeared. Thus 
he would seize the sleeping secret of his 
physiognomy, and if any appreciable resem- 
blance existed, it should not escape him. 

But if Jean woke, what should he say ? 
How explain his visit ? 

He remained standing, his fingers grasping 
the door-handle, and seeking a reason or 
pretext. 

He remembered all at once that, eight 
days before, he had lent his brother a phial 
of laudanum to allay a fit of toothache. He 
might have toothache himself this night, and 
come to get the bottle. Then he entered, 
but with a furtive step like a thief. 

Jean, with his mouth half open, was sleep- 
ing a profound animal sleep. His beard and 
fair hair made a splash of gold in the white 



160 Pierre and Jean. 

linen. He did not awake, but his heavy 
breathing ceased. 

Pierre bent over him and gazed on him 
with hungry eye. No ; this young man did 
not resemble Roland, and, for the second 
time, his mind returned to the miniature of 
Marechai that had disappeared. He must 
find it. Seeing it, perhaps he would doubt 
no longer. 

His brother stirred, disturbed doubtless 
by his presence, or by the light of the taper 
penetrating his eyelids. Then the doctor 
drew back, on tiptoe, toward the door, which 
he closed noiselessly. He returned to his 
room, but did not go to bed. 

The day was slow in coming. The hours 
were struck, one after another, by the draw- 
ing-room clock, whose bell had a grave, 
deep tone, as if the little specimen of horol- 
ogy had swallowed the bell of a cathedral. 
The sounds rose up through the empty stair- 
case, traversed walls and dcors, and died away 
in the depths of the rooms, in the dead ear of 
the sleepers. Pierre walked to and fro from 
his bed to the window. What should he do ? 




THE LIKENESS 



Mother and Son. 163 

Eie was too much upset to pass the day at 
home. He wished still to be alone, at least 
till the next day, in order to reflect, calm 
himself, or fortify himself for the every-day 
life which he had to resume. 

Well, he would go to Trouville, and watch 
the crowd swarming on the beach. It would 
divert him, change the current of his thoughts, 
and give him time to prepare himself for the 
horrible thing that he had found out. 

At earliest dawn he made his toilet and 
dressed. The fog had lifted ; it was a fine, 
very fine day. As the Trouville boat did 
not sail till nine o'clock, the doctor thought 
that he ought to embrace his mother before 
leaving. 

He waited for the hour when she rose 
every day, and then went down. His heart 
beat so fiercely as he touched the door that 
he paused to take breath. His hand, as it 
lay on the door-handle, was weak and 
quivering, almost incapable of the slight 
exertion of turning the knob to enter. He 
knocked. His mother's voice asked : 

" Who is there ? " 



164 Pierre and Jean. 

" Pierre." 

"What do you want ?" 

" To say good-morning, because I am 
going to pass the day at Trouville with 
some friends." 

''But I am still in bed." 

" Do not disturb yourself, then ; I shall 
embrace you when I return, this evening." 

He hoped that he could get away without 
seeing her, without pressing on her cheeks 
the kiss which made his heart rise before- 
hand. 

But she replied : 

" A moment ; I'll open the door. You 
must wait till I am back in bed." 

He heard her bare feet on the flour, and 
then the sound of the bolt sliding. She 
cried : 

" Come in ! " 

He went in. She was sitting in her bed, 
while, on his side, Roland, with a silk hand- 
kerchief round his head, and his face to the 
wall, continued to sleep. Nothing but a 
shake of the arm could have awakened him. 
On the days he went fishing, the maid, who 



Mother and Son. 165 

had been rung up at the appointed hour by 
the sailor Papagris, used to come and drag 
her master from this invincible repose. 

Pierre, as he approached, looked at his 
mother, and it seemed to him all at once 
that he had never seen her. 

She held out her cheek ; he kissed it twice, 
and then seated himself on a low chair. 

" You decided on this party yesterday 
evening ? " she said. 

"Yes, yesterday evening." 

" You will be back for dinner ? " 

" I do not know yet. In any case, do not 
wait for me." 

He examined her with stupefied curiosity. 
It was his mother, this woman here ! All 
this countenance, seen from childhood, since 
his eye could distinguish, this smile, this 
voice, so well known, so familiar, appeared 
to him, abruptly, quite new, quite other than 
what they had been hitherto for him. He 
understood at this instant that, loving her, 
he had never looked at her. Yet it was she, 
and he knew every smallest detail of her 
countenance ; but he perceived these little 



1 66 Pierre and Jean. 



details, sharply, for the first time. His anx- 
ious attention, as he scrutinized this beloved 
face, revealed it to him as something different, 
with a physiognomy which he had never dis- 
covered. 

He rose to go, and then, suddenly yielding 
to the unconquerable desire of knowing what 
had been gnawing his heart since the even- 
ing before : 

" Oh, say ! I fancy I remember there used 
to be, once, in Paris, a miniature of Marechal 
in our parlor." 

She hesitated a second or two, or at least 
he imagined that she hesitated ; then she 
said : 

"Oh, yes!" 

" What has become of this portrait ? " 

Her answer, again, might have come 
quicker : 

" That portrait— wait — I do not quite 
know — perhaps I have it in my secretary." 

" You would be very kind to find it for 
me." 

"Yes, I'll look. Why do you want it ?" 

" Oh, not for myself ! I thought it would 



Mother and Son. 167 

be quite natural to give it to Jean, and it 
would please my brother." 

" You are right. It is a happy thought. I 
will look for it as soon as I get up." 

He left the room. 

It was a cloudless day without a breath of 
air. The people in the streets seemed light- 
hearted ; merchants were going to their busi- 
ness, clerks to their office, girls to their shops. 
Some of them were singing, gladdened by 
the clearness of the day. 

The passengers were already going on 
board the Trouville boat. Pierre took his 
seat, quite at the stern, on a wooden bench. 

He asked himself : 

" Was she disquieted by my question about 
the portrait, or only surprised ? Has she mis- 
laid it or hidden it ? Does she know or does 
she really not know where it is ? If she has 
hidden it, why ?" 

Advancing steadily from deduction to de- 
duction, he reached this conclusion : 

The portrait, the portrait of a friend, the 
portrait of a lover, had remained in the par- 
lor in full view till the day when the wife or 



1 68 Pierre and Jean. 

the mother had been the first to perceive, 
before any one else, that it resembled her 
son. Doubtless, for a long time she had 
been looking out to detect the resemblance ; 
and when she had detected it, had seen it 
become more apparent, and had recognized 
that any one, some day or other, might detect 
it also, then, some evening, she had removed 
the alarming miniature, and as she did not 
dare to destroy it, had concealed it. 

Pierre now remembered very well that the 
miniature had disappeared long ago, long 
before their departure from Paris. It had 
disappeared, he believed, when the growth of 
Jean's beard made him all at once the image 
of the fair-haired young man who smiled in 
the frame. 

The movement of the boat as she put off 
troubled the course of his thoughts and dis- 
persed them. He rose and looked at the 
sea. 

The little packet-boat passed the jetties, 
turned to the left, and puffing, panting, and 
quivering, took her course to the distant 
coast, which was visible through the morning 



Mother ami Son. 169 

mist. Here and there the red sail of some 
heavy fishing-boat, lying motionless on the 
smooth sea, had the air of a huge rock rising 
from the water. The Seine, as it came down 




from Rouen, seemed a large arm of the sea, 
that separated two neighboring countries. 

In less than an hour Trouvillewas reached, 
and, as it was the time for bathing, Pierre 
betook himself to the beach. 

From a distance it had the look of a long 



170 Pierre a fid Jean. 

garden full of open flowers. On the great 
bank of yellow sand, stretching from the 
jetty to the Roches Noires, parasols of every 
color, hats of every shape, dresses of every 
shade, in groups before the bathing-houses, 
in lines along the sea, or scattered here and 
there, resembled, in truth, enormous bouquets 
in an immeasurable meadow. The confused 
sounds, near or far, of voices sharpened by 
the thin air, the calls, the cries of children 
being bathed, the clear laughter of women, 
all formed a sweet, unbroken clamor, which 
was blended with the imperceptible sea air, 
and was inhaled with it. 

Pierre walked in the middle of these peo- 
ple, more lost, more separated from them, 
more isolated, more immersed in torturing 
thought, than if he had been flung from a 
ship's deck into the sea, a hundred leagues 
from shore. He brushed against them ; he 
heard, without listening, a few phrases ; and 
he saw, without looking, the men talk to 
the women and the women smile on the 
men. 

Then, at once, as if starting from sleep, 



Mather and Son. 171 

he perceived them distinctly; and a hatred 
against them seized him, for they seemed 
happy and content. 

He went on, brushing against the groups 
and circling round them, a prey to new 
thoughts. All these many-colored toilets 
that covered the sands like a bed of flowers, 
these pretty stuffs, these showy sunshades, 
the factitious gracefulness of imprisoned 
waists, all the ingenious inventions of fash- 
ion, from the tiny shoe to the extravagant 
hat, the seduction of gesture, voice, and smile 
— the whole coquetry displayed on the 
beach suddenly seemed to him an immense 
flowering of feminine perversity. All these 
dressed-up women wanted to please, to 
seduce, to tempt, some one. They had made 
themselves beautiful for men, for all men, 
except the husband whom they had no longer 
need to conquer. They had made themselves 
beautiful for the lover of to-day and the 
lover of to-morrow ; for the stranger they 
met, noticed, perhaps expected. 

And these men seated by them, eye gazing 
into eye, lips speaking to neighboring lips, 



172 Pierre and Jean. 

summoned them, desired them, hunted them 
like game, like game agile and flying, although 
it seemed so near and so easy. The vast 
beach was, then, only a love-market, where 
some sold themselves, and others gave them- 
selves ; where these bargained for their ca- 
resses, and those only held out promises. All 
these women had only one thought — to offer 
and make men desire their bodies, which 
were already sold, already promised, to other 
men. And he thought it was always the 
same thing the whole world over. 

His mother had done like the rest ; that 
was all ! Like the rest ?— no ! There were 
exceptions — many, many exceptions. The 
women he saw around him, rich, silly, seekers 
for love, were, on the whole, coquettes of the 
elegant world of fashion, or even coquettes 
with a market price ; for respectable women, 
kept close at home, were never met at the 
beach trod by this legion of idlers. 

The tide rose and gradually drove town- 
wards the first line of bathers. Groups were 
seen to rise with a start, and fly, taking their 
chairs with them, before the yellow flood which 




AT TKOUVILLE, ON THE BEACH 



Mother and Son. 175 



was coming in, fringed with a light lacework 
of foam. The bathing-boxes on wheels were 
dragged up by the horse attached to each, 
and on the board walk, which ran along the 
beach from one end to the other, there was 
now an unbroken, dense, slow stream of ele- 
gant crowds, which formed two contrary cur- 
rents, that jostled and blended. Pierre, in a 
state of nervous exasperation by the throng, 
fled and plunged into the town, where he 
■stopped to breakfast at a common wine-shop 
at the beginning of the fields. 

When he had taken his coffee, he stretched 
himself out on two chairs before the door, 
and, as he had scarcely slept the night before, 
dozed in the shadow of a lime-tree. 

After some hours of repose he roused him- 
self, and, seeing that it was time to return to 
catch the boat, he set out, though oppressed 
by a sudden weakness that had fallen on him 
during his slumber. He was determined to 
return, and learn if his mother had found the 
portrait of Marechal. Would she be the first 
to speak of it, or would he have to ask her 
again ? Beyond question, if she waited till 



i 76 Pierre and Jean. 

he interrogated her once more, she had a 
secret reason for not showing the portrait. 

But when he had entered his room he 
hesitated to go down to dinner. He would 
suffer too much. His throbbing heart had 
not yet time to regain its quiet. Still he 
made up his mind, and appeared in the 
dining-room as they were sitting down to 
table. 

An air of joy animated their faces. 

" Well," said Roland, " how does it go on, 
that shopping of yours ? I do not want to 
see anything before it's all in place." 

His wife replied : 

" Going on very well. Only it requires 
long reflection to avoid making a mis- 
match. The furniture gives us much to think 
of." 

She had passed the day in visiting with 
Jean the carpet stores and furniture stores. 
She wanted rich materials, rather gaudy, to 
strike the eye. Her son, on the other hand, 
wanted something simple, with an air of dis- 
tinction. So, over every sample shown them, 
they both of them repeated their arguments. 



Mother and Son. 177 

She maintained that the client required to be 
impressed, that he ought to experience, when 
he entered the waiting-room, the feeling of 
wealth. 

Jean, on the contrary, wishing to attract 
only an opulent and fashionable clientele, 
desired to conquer the refined classes by his 
modest and impeccable taste. 

The discussion, which had lasted all day, 
began again with the soup. 

Roland had no opinion. He repeated : 

" I do not want to hear about anything. 
I'll go and see it when it is finished." 

Madame Roland appealed to the judgment 
of her elder son. 

"Come, Pierre, what do you think?" 

His nerves were so excited that he longed 
to reply with an oath. He said, however, in 
a dry tone, vibrating with indignation : 

" Oh, I quite agree with Jean, for my part ! 
I like simplicity, which is, as regards taste, 
comparable to uprightness as regards char- 
acter." 

His mother resumed : 

" Remember, we live in a town of business 
12 



178 Pierre and Jean. 

people, where good taste is not met every- 
where." 

Pierre replied : 

"What matter? Is that a reason to imi- 
tate fools ? If my townsfolk are stupid or 
dishonest, am 1 bound to follow their exam- 
ple ? A woman will not go astray because 
her neighbors have lovers." 

Jean burst into laughter. 

" You have arguments by comparison that 
seem taken from the maxims of a moralist." 

Pierre made no rejoinder, and his mother 
and brother recommenced their talk of stuffs 
and arm-chairs. 

He looked at them as he had looked at 
his mother, in the morning, before he left for 
Trouville. He looked at them like an obser- 
vant stranger ; and, in fact, he fancied that 
he had come, all at once, into an unknown 
family. 

His father, most of all, astonished him as 
he saw and thought about him. This fat, 
flabby man, this contented simpleton, was his 
father — his ! No, no, Jean was not a bit 
like him. 



Mother and Son. 179 

His family ! Two days ago an unknown, 
maleficent hand, the hand of a dead man, had 
rent and broken, one by one, all the bonds 
that held together these four souls. It was 
all over, shattered forever. No mother now 
for him ; for he could not love her when he 
could not venerate her with that absolute, 
tender, and pious respect which the filial 
heart requires. No brother now for him, for 
this brother was the child of a stranger. 
There remained for him only a father — this 
fat man, whom he could not love in spite of 
himself. 

He broke silence abruptly : 

" O mamma, have you found the por- 
trait ? " 

She opened her eyes in surprise. 

"What portrait ? " 

" Marechal's." 

" No — that is, yes ; I have not found it, 
but I think I know where it is." 

" What are you talking about ? " Roland 
inquired. 

Pierre answered : 

" A miniature of Marechal, that used to 



1S0 Pierre and Jean. 

be in our little parlor in Paris. I thought 
that Jean might like to have it." 

Roland exclaimed : 

"Yes, certainly, I remember it perfectly. 
I saw it again at the end of last week. Your 
mother pulled it out of her secretary when 
she was arranging her papers. It was Thurs- 
day or Friday. — You remember, Louise, don't 
you ? I was just going to shave when you 
took it from a drawer and placed it on a chair 
beside you, with a heap of letters of which 
you burned half. Is not it odd that you 
should have handled that portrait scarcely 
two or three days before Jean's legacy came ? 
If I believed in presentiments, I should call 
it one." 

Madame Roland tranquilly replied : 

" Yes, I know where it is. I will go and 
bring it at once." 

Then she had been lying ! She had lied 
that very morning, when she replied to her 
son's question as to what had become of the 
miniature : "I do not know exactly — per- 
haps I have it in my secretary." 

She had seen it, touched it, handled it, 



Mother and Son. 



looked at it, a few days before, and then she 
had rehidden it in the secret drawer with 
some letters — his letters. 

Pierre looked at his mother who had lied 
to him. He looked at her with the exasper- 
ated wrath of a son whose sacred affection 
had been betrayed and filched, and with the 
jealousy of a man who after long blindness 
at length detects a shameful treason. If he 
had been that woman's husband, he, her son, 
would have seized her by the wrists, by the 
shoulders, or by the hair, and have hurled her 
to the ground, and have smitten and torn 
and crushed her ! Yet he could say nothing, 
do nothing, state nothing, reveal nothing. 
He was her son, he had nothing to avenge, 
he had not been betrayed. 

But yes, she had betrayed him in his affec- 
tion, in his filial respect. She owed to him 
to be irreproachable, as all owe to their chil- 
dren. If the wrath which made his blood 
boil amounted almost to hatred, it was be- 
cause he felt her to be more criminal toward 
him than toward his father himself. 

The love of man and wife is a voluntary 



1 82 Pierre and Jean. 

pact, where the one who fails is guilty only 
of perfidy ; but when a wife has become a 
mother her duty has increased, since Nature 
has confided to her a race. If she succumbs 
then, she is cowardly, worthless, infamous ! 

"Well, well," said Roland suddenly, ex- 
tending his legs under the table, as he did 
every evening, to sip his glass of cassis. " It 
is not hard to live on doing nothing when 
one has a little competence. I hope Jean 
will give us some dinners extra, now. It will 
go hard with him if I get sometimes a pain 
in my stomach." 

Then, turning to his wife : 

" Go bring the portrait, pussy, as you have 
done eating. I should like to see it again." 

She rose, took a candle, and went. After 
an absence which seemed long to Pierre, 
although it only lasted three minutes, Madame 
Roland returned, smiling, and holding by its 
ring a gilt, old-fashioned frame. 

" Here it is," she said. " I found it almost 
at once." 

The doctor was the first to extend his 
hand. He took the portrait and examined it 



Mother and Son. 183 

at a little distance, at arm's-length. Then, 
feeling that his mother was looking at him, he 
slowly raised his eyes to his brother, to com- 
pare him with it. He almost said in the 
impulse of his violence : " See, this is like 
Jean." If he did not dare to utter these 
terrible words, he displayed his thoughts by 
the way in which he compared the living face 
and the painted face. 

They had, certainly, some common traits — 
the same beard and the same brow, but noth- 
ing so precise as to permit the declaration, 
" Here is the father, and here the son." It 
was rather a family resemblance of kindred 
countenances animated by the same blood. 
But what was more decisive in Pierre's mind 
than this look in the two faces, was the fact 
that his mother rose, turned her back, and 
pretended to lock up in a cupboard, with 
excessive slowness, the sugar and the cassis. 

She saw that he knew or at least suspected. 

" Hand it to me," said Roland. Pierre 
handed over the miniature, and his father 
drew the candle nearer to see it better. Then 
in a softened tone he said : 



184 Pierre and Jean. 

" Poor fellow ! To think that he was like 
that when we knew him. How time flies ! 
He was a handsome man, all the same, at 
that period, and pleasant in his manners. 
Wasn't he, Louise ? " 

As his wife did not reply, he continued: 

" And what an even temper ! I never saw 
him in a bad humor. Well, it's over ; there's 
nothing remaining — except what he left to 
Jean. We can swear that our friend here 
was good and loyal to the end. Even when 
dying he did not forget us." 

Jean, in his turn, extended his arm to take 
the portrait. He looked at it for some 
moments, and then, in a tone of regret : 

" I do not recognize him at all. I can only 
remember him with white hair." 

He returned the miniature to his mother. 
She cast on it a rapid glance, which was soon 
withdrawn and seemed timid ; then, in her 
natural voice : 

" It belongs to you now, Jean, since you 
are his heir. We must carry it to your new 
rooms." 

As they entered the parlor, she placed the 



Mother and Son. 185 



miniature on the mantelpiece, near the clock, 
where it used to stand. 

Roland filled his pipe, Pierre and Jean 
lighted cigarettes. Usually one brother used 
to smoke walking up and down the room ; 
the other, buried in an easy-chair, with his 
legs crossed. The father always straddled a 
chair and spat into the fireplace. 

Madame Roland, on a low seat, near a 
little table that supported the lamp, was 
accustomed to embroider, knit, or mark the 
linen. 

This evening she commenced a piece of 
needlework for Jean's bedroom. It was a 
difficult and complicated piece of work, and 
the beginning required all her attention. 
Nevertheless, from time to time her eye, 
while counting the stitches, was raised and 
directed, quickly and furtively, to the little 
portrait of the dead man which leaned against 
the clock. The doctor, who crossed the nar- 
row room in four or five strides, his hands 
behind his back, and his cigarette between 
his lips, encountered his mother's look every 
time. 



1 86 Pierre and Jean. 

One might say that they were playing the 
spy on each other, and that war would be 
declared between them ; and a painful dis- 
quiet, an insupportable disquiet, wrung Pierre's 
heart. Tortured and satisfied at the same 
time, he said to himself : " She ought to suffer 
at this moment, if she knows that I have di- 
vined her." And at each return toward the 
fireplace, he stopped for a few seconds to 
look at the blond countenance of Marechal, 
just to show that a fixed idea haunted him. 
And the little portrait, smaller than an open 
hand, seemed a living, malevolent, terrible 
personage that had suddenly entered this 
house and this family. 

Suddenly the door-bell rang. Madame 
Roland, always so calm, was startled, and the 
start revealed to the doctor the trouble of 
her nerves. 

She said, however, " It must be Madame 
Rosemilly," and her anxious glance was again 
raised to the mantelpiece. 

Pierre understood, or thought he under- 
stood, her terror and her anguish. Women's 
eyes are sharp, their wits nimble, their minds 



Mother and Son. 187 



suspicious. When the incoming visitor should 
perceive this unknown miniature, she might, 
perhaps, at the first glance, discover the re- 
semblance between that face and Jean's face. 
Then she would know and understand it all ! 
He was seized with dread, a sudden, horri- 
ble dread, that the shame would be unveiled ; 
and, turning back as the door opened, he 
took the portrait and slid it under the clock 
without his father or brother seeing the 
action. 

As he again encountered his mother's eyes, 
they seemed to him changed, troubled, and 
haggard. 

"Good-day," said Madame Rosemilly; " I 
have come to take a cup of tea with you." 

While they gathered about her to ask how 
she was, Pierre disappeared by the door that 
had been left open. 

They were surprised when they discovered 
his departure. Jean, who was discontented 
at it on account of the young woman, who, 
he feared, would deem it rude, muttered : 

" What a bear ! " 

Madame Roland replied : 



1 88 



Pierre and Jean. 



" You must not be angry with him — he is 
not very well to-day, and, moreover, is tired 
with his journey to Trouville." 

"No matter," rejoined Roland. "That's 
no reason for going off like a savage." 

Madame Rosemilly tried to smooth things 
down by saying : 

" No, no. He took leave a Vanglaise. In 
society that is always the way when one leaves 
early." 

"Well," replied Jean, "that may be so in 
society ; but one does not treat one's family 
a Vanglaise, and that is what my brother has 
been doing some time past." 




JEAN AND MADAME ROSEMILLY 



VI. 



Nothing happened in the Roland house- 
hold for a week or two. The father went 
fishing ; Jean, with his mother's assistance, 
was settling himself in his new rooms ; Pierre 
showed his gloomy countenance only at meal- 
times. 

His father asked him one evening : 

" Why the devil do you look as if you 
were at a funeral ? I have noticed it before 
to-day." 

And the doctor replied : 

" Because I feel the terrible burden of 
life." 



192 Pierre and Jean. 

The old fellow understood nothing of his 
meaning, and with an air of disappointment 
continued: 

" By George, it is too bad ! Ever since we 
have had the luck of receiving that legacy, 
everybody seems miserable ; just as if some 
accident had happened us, or we were in 
mourning for some one." 

" In fact, I am in mourning for some one," 
said Pierre. 

'' You ! for whom ? " 

" Some one you did not know, and whom 
I loved too well." 

Roland imagined he was talking of some 
love-affair, and asked : 

" A woman, of course ? " 

" Yes, a woman." 

" Dead ? " 

" No, worse. Lost ! ' 

" Ah ! " 

Although he was astonished at this unex- 
pected confidence, made to him in his wife's 
presence, and at his son's strange tone, he did 
not pursue the subject, for he thought that 
such matters did not concern third parties. 



Jean and Madame Ros/milly. 193 



Madame Roland seemed not to have 
heard ; she was very pale, and therefore 
looked sick. 

Her husband, surprised at seeing her sit 
down as if she fell into her chair, and at hear- 
ing her breathe as if respiration was difficult, 
had already repeatedly observed to her : 

" You do look very sick, Louise. You 
fatigue yourself too much in arranging things 
for Jean. Rest a bit, confound it all ! He is 
not in a hurry, the young swell, for he is rich." 

She shook her head without reply. 

Her paleness, on this day, was so great that 
Roland again remarked it. 

" Come, " he said, " this won't do at all, my 
poor old girl ; we must look after you." 

Then, turning to his son : 

" You see, don't you, that she is ill ? You 
have examined her, I suppose ? " 

Pierre replied : 

" No ; I did not notice that she ailed any- 
thing." 

Roland lost his temper. 

" Why, it stares you in the face, doggone 
it ! What's the use of being a doctor, if you 
13 



194 Pierre and Jean. 

cannot even see that your mother is indis- 
posed ! Now, look at her! Just look at 
her ! No, indeed ; one might be dying, and 
this doctor here would not notice it." 

Madame Roland breathed heavily, and 
grew so wan that her husband exclaimed : 

" She's going to be ill ! " 

*' No — no — it is nothing ! It will pass off 
— it is nothing." 

Pierre approached her, and, looking at her 
fixedly, said : 

" Let us see. What is the matter?" 

" Nothing — nothing, I assure you— -noth- 
ing," she repeated in a low, hurried voice. 

Roland had gone for some aromatic vine- 
gar ; he returned, and presenting the bottle 
to his son : 

" Here — quiet her nerves. You have felt 
her pulse, at any rate ? " 

As Pierre bent forward to take her wrist, 
she drew back her hand with such an abrupt 
movement that she struck a chair near her. 

"Come," he said in a cold tone, "let me 
attend to you, as you are ill." 

She rose and extended her arm. The skin 



Jean and Madame Roseniilly. 195 

was burning, the pulse was irregular and 
jerky. He muttered : 

" In fact, it is pretty serious. You must 
take some soothing medicine. I'll go and 
write a prescription." 

While he was bending over the paper and 
writing, a slight sound of suppressed sighs, 
of choking, of short, interrupted breathing, 
made him suddenly turn round. 

She was weeping, with her hands over her 
face. 

Roland, in alarm, asked : 

" Louise, Louise, what is the matter ? 
what is the matter ? " 

She made no response, and seemed torn by 
some horrible and profound sorrow. 

Her husband tried to take hold of her 
hands and pull them from her face. She 
resisted, repeating : 

" No, no, no." 

Then he turned to his son : 

" Why, what is the matter with her ? I 
never saw her like this." 

" It is nothing," said Pierre ; " a slight 
nervous attack." 



196 Pierre and Jean. 

It seemed to him as if his heart was com- 
forted at the sight of her anguish, and that 
this grief lightened his resentment and dimin- 
ished her debt of opprobrium. He looked at 
her like a judge satisfied with his work. 

But all at once she rose and rushed to the 
door, so suddenly and abruptly that it could 
neither be foreseen nor prevented, and ran to 
shut herself up in her room. 

Father and son were left face to face. 

" Do you understand anything of the 
case ? " said the former. 

" Yes," replied the latter. " It comes from 
a simple little nervous disturbance which often 
declares itself at mamma's age. It is likely 
that she will have many more attacks like 
this one." 

Indeed she had others, nearly every day ; 
attacks which Pierre seemed to provoke by a 
single word, as if he held the secret of her 
strange and unknown trouble He looked 
out for intermissions of repose in her face, 
and, with all the art of a torturer, awoke by a 
single word the grief which for a moment had 
been calmed. 



Jean and Madame Rosemilly. 197 



And he suffered as much as she. He suf- 
fered frightfully from no longer loving her, 
from no longer respecting her, and from tor- 
turing her. When he had set bleeding the 
wound that he had opened in this heart of 
wife and mother, when he felt how wretched 
and how desperate she was, he would wander 
all alone through the town, so pierced with 
remorse, so racked with pity, so woe-begone 
at seeing her thus crushed by his filial con- 
tempt, that he longed to fling himself into the 
sea and drown himself to make an end of it 
all. 

Oh, how he wished to pardon her now ! 
but he could not, for he was unable to forget. 
If he had only been able not to cause her 
suffering ! but he could not do that either, for 
he was always suffering himself. He returned 
home at meal-times, full of gentler resolutions. 
Then when he caught sight of her, when he 
saw her eyes — once so frank and direct, now 
timid, distracted, shrinking — he smote in spite 
of himself, for he could not keep back the 
treacherous phrase which rose to his lips. 

The shameful secret, known to them alone, 



io8 Pierre and Jean. 

spurred him on against her. It was poison 
that he had at present in his veins, and that 
made him long to bite like a mad dog. 

There was nothing now to prevent his 
torturing her unceasingly ; for Jean was 
almost altogether in his new rooms, and 
returned to the house only to dine and sleep 
every evening with his family. 

He often witnessed the bitter words and 
violent manner of his brother, but attributed 
them to jealousy. He promised himself to 
put him in his proper place and give him a 
lesson some day or other, for the family life 
was becoming quite painful through these 
continual scenes. But, as he lived out of the 
house at this time, he suffered less from 
Pierre's offensive rudeness, and his love of 
peace urged him to patience. Besides, fortune 
had intoxicated him, and his thoughts chiefly 
rested on things which had a direct interest 
for him. He came in full of new little cares, 
occupied with the cut of a jacket, the shape 
of a felt hat, the proper size for visiting-cards. 
And he talked persistently about all the 
details of his apartment — -of shelves placed in 



Jean and Madame Rose'milly. 201 



the bedroom cupboard to hold his linen, of 
portmanteaus piled in the vestibule, and of 
electric burglar-alarms. 

It had been decided that at the house- 
warming of his new suite of rooms there 
should be an excursion to Saint Jouin, and 
that the party should, after dinner, return and 
take tea with him. Roland wished to go by 
sea ; but the distance and the uncertainty as 
to the time when they would arrive by this 
route, if the wind was contrary, led them to 
reject his proposal, and a break was hired for 
the occasion. 

The departure took place about ten o'clock, 
so as to arrive for breakfast. The dusty 
high-road traversed the country district of 
Normandy, to which the undulating plains and 
the tree-girt farms lent the appearance of a 
park without limits. As the carriage rolled 
on at the slow trot of two heavy horses, the 
Roland family, Madame Rosemilly, and Cap- 
tain Beausire, deafened by the clatter of the 
wheels, remained silent, and closed their eyes 
in the clouds of dust. 

The harvest was ripe. Beside the dull 



202 Pierre and Jean. 

green of the clover, and the bright green of 
the beets, the yellow stalks of wheat illumi- 
nated the plains with a tawny golden gleam. 
They seemed to have imbibed the sunlight 
that fell upon them. Here and there the 
reapers were at work ; and in the fields at- 
tacked by the scythe the laborers were seen, 
swinging rhythmically as they swept the 
huge, wing-shaped blade over the surface of 
the ground. 

After a drive of two hours, the break 
turned to the left, passed near a windmill in 
motion — a gray melancholy wreck, half rotten 
and condemned, the last survivor of the old 
mills — and then entered a pretty courtyard, 
and drew up before a gay little house, a cele- 
brated inn of the district. 

The landlady, who was named la belle 
Alphonsine, came smiling to the door, and 
extended her hand to the two ladies, who were 
hesitating at the carriage-steps, which were 
awkwardly high. 

On the margin of the lawn, beneath the 
shade of some apple-trees, a party of stran- 
gers were already breakfasting in a tent ; they 



Jean and Madame Rosemilly. 203 

were Parisians from Etretat, and the sound 
of voices, of laughter, and of clinking plates 
could be heard in the house. 

All the large halls being occupied, they had 





to dine in a private room. M. Roland at 
once saw hanging on the wall some shrimp 
nets. 

" Ah, ha ! " he cried, " do they fish for 
prawns here ? " 

" Yes," replied Beausire ; " this is the very 



204 Pierre and Jean. 

spot where they take more than on any other 
part of the coast." 

" Shall we go there after breakfast ? " 

It was ascertained that it was low water at 
three o'clock, and it was resolved that all the 
party should pass the afternoon on the rocks 
looking for shrimps. 

They ate sparingly, to avoid the flow of 
blood to the head when they had their feet 
in the water. They wished, too, to reserve 
their appetites for dinner, which was ordered 
on a grand scale, to be ready at six when 
they returned. 

Roland could not control his impatience. 
He wanted to buy the special apparatus em- 
ployed in this style of fishing, and which 
resembles very much that used to catch 
butterflies in the fields. 

It consists of little pockets of network, 
attached to a wooden ring at the end of a 
long pole. Alphonsine, smiling all the time, 
lent them the nets ; then she assisted the ladies 
in making an improvised toilet to avoid wet- 
ting their dresses ; she lent them some petti- 
coats, thick worsted stockings, and bathing 



Jean and Madame Rosemilly. 205 

slippers. The men took off their boots, and 
bought at the cobblers' some wooden shoes 
and clogs in their place. 

They started out, net on shoulder, and 
basket on back. Madame Rosemilly was 
charming in this costume, with an unex- 
pected, rustic, fearless style of beauty. 

The petticoat borrowed from Alphonsine, 
coquettishly raised and held by a few 
stitches, so as to enable the wearer to run and 
leap, without fear, among the rocks, displayed 
her ankle and the lower part of the calf — 
the firm calf of a woman at once agile and 
strong. Her figure was loose, to leave all her 
movements easy ; and she had found, to cover 
her head, an immense gardener's hat of 
yellow straw, with enormous flaps, to which 
a sprig of tamarisk, holding one side cocked 
up, gave the dauntless air of a dashing 
mousquetaire. 

Jean, since receiving his legacy, had asked 
himself every day whether he should marry 
her or no. Every time he saw her, he felt 
decided to make her his wife ; but when he 
was alone he thought that, meanwhile, there 



206 Pierre and Jean. 



was time to reflect. She was now not as rich 
as he was, for she possessed only twelve thou- 
sand francs a year, but in real estate farms, and 
lots in Havre on the docks, and this might, 
in time, be worth a large sum. Their for- 
tunes, then, were almost equivalent ; and the 
young widow, assuredly, pleased him much. 

As he saw her walking before him on this 
day, he thought, " Well, I must decide. Be- 
yond question, I could not do better." 

They followed the slope of a little valley, 
descending from the village to the cliff, and 
the cliff at the end of this valley looked down 
on the sea from a height of nearly three 
hundred feet. Framed in by the green coast, 
sinking away to the left and right, a spacious 
triangle of water, silvery blue in the sunlight, 
was visible, and a sail, scarcely perceptible, 
looked like an insect down below. The sky, 
filled with radiance, was so blended with the 
water that the eye could not distinguish 
where one ended and the other began ; and 
the two ladies, who were in front of the three 
men, cast on this clear horizon the clear out- 
line of their compact figures. 



Jean and Madame RosSniilly. 207 



Jean, with ardent glance, saw speeding 
before him the well-turned ankle, the delicate 
leg, the supple waist, and the enticing hat of 
Madame Rosemilly. Every movement stimu- 
lated his desire, and urged him to those 
decisive resolutions which the timid and the 
hesitating take abruptly. The warm air, in 
which was blended the scent of the coast, 
of the reeds, the clover, the grasses, and the 
marine odor of the rocks exposed by the 
tide, animated him with a gentle intoxication ; 
and he decided, more and more at every 
step, at every second, at every look he cast 
on the graceful outline of the young woman ; 
he decided to hesitate no longer, to tell her 
that he loved her, and wanted to marry her. 
The fishing party would be of service : it 
woidd render a tetc-a-tcte more easy, and, 
besides, it would furnish a pretty background, 
a pretty scene for words of love, with their 
feet in a basin of limpid water, as they 
watched the long feelers of the shrimps dart- 
ing through the seaweeds. 

When they reached the end of the valley 
at the edge of the bluff, they perceived a 



208 Pierre and Jean. 

little path that ran down the cliff ; and below 
them, between the sea and the foot of the 
precipice, about half way down, a wondrous 
chaos of enormous rocks, that had fallen or 
been hurled down, heaped on each other on 
a kind of grassy, broken plain, that disap- 
peared toward the south, and which had been 
formed by ancient landslips. In the long 
strip of brushwood and turf, tossed, one 
might say, by the throes of a volcano, the 
fallen rocks resembled the ruins of a great 
vanished city, that, once on a time, had looked 
down on the ocean, itself dominated by the 
white and endless wall of the cliff. 

" How beautiful ! " said Madame Rose- 
milly, pausing. 

Jean joined her, and with beating heart 
offered his hand to guide her down the narrow 
steps cut in the rock. 

They went on in front, while Beausire, 
stiffening himself on his short legs, held out 
his bent arm to Madame Roland, who was 
dazed by the blank depth. 

Roland and Pierre came last ; and the 
doctor had to support his father, who was so 



[can and Madame Rostmilly. 209 

troubled by vertigo that he sat down, and 
thus slid from step to step. 

The young people, who descended at the 
head of the party, went rapidly, and suddenly 
caught sight of a streamlet of pure water 
springing from a little hole in the cliff, by the 
side of a wooden bench which formed a rest- 
ing place about the middle of the slope. The 
streamlet at first spread into a basin about the 
size of a wash-hand bowl, which it had exca- 
vated for itself, and then, falling in a cascade 
of about two feet in height, flowed across 
the path where a carpet of cress had grown, 
and then disappeared in the reeds and grass, 
across the level where the landslips were 
heaped up. 

" How thirsty I am ! " cried Madame 
Rosemilly. 

But how to drink ? She tried to collect 
in the hollow of her hand the water which 
escaped between her fingers. Jean had a 
bright idea ; he placed a stone in the road, 
and she knelt on it to drink from the very 
source with her lips, which thus were raised 
to the same height. 
M 



2io Pierre and Jean. 

When she raised her head, covered with 
glittering drops sprinkled by thousands over 
her face, her hair, her eyelashes, her bust, 
Jean, bending toward her, whispered : 

" How pretty you are ! " 

She replied in the tone one assumes to 
scold a child : 

" Will you hold your tongue ? " 

These were the first words of flirtation 
which they exchanged. 

"Come," said Jean, rather discomfited, 
"let us be off before they overtake us." 

In fact, he was aware that Captain Beausire 
was quite close to them, who was descend- 
ing backwards in order to support Madame 
Roland with both hands, while, higher up 
and farther away, M. Roland, in a sitting 
posture, was dragging himself down by his 
feet and elbows with the speed of a tortoise, 
and Pierre went before him to superintend 
his movements. 

The path became less steep, and formed 
now a sloping road that skirted the enormous 
blocks that had fallen from above. Madame 
Rosemilly and Jean began to run, and were 



Jean and Madame Rose'milly. 211 

soon on the shingle. They crossed it to gain 
the rocks, which extended in a long and flat 
surface covered with seaweed, in which in- 
numerable flashes of water glittered. The 
tide was low and far out, behind this slimy 
plain of sea-wreck with its shining green and 
black growths. 

Jean rolled up his trousers to his knee, 
and his sleeves to the elbow, so as to wet 
himself with impunity, and cried " Forward," 
as he boldly leaped into the first pool that 
presented itself. 

With more prudence, though with equal 
determination to wade into the water at once, 
the young woman went around the narrow 
basin with timid steps, for she slipped on the 
slimy weeds. 

" Do you see anything ? " she said. 

" Yes, I see your face reflected in the 
water." 

" If you see only that, you will not have 
any fishing to boast of." 

He said in a tender voice : 

" Ah, that is the fishing I shall prefer over 
all ! " 



212 Pierre and Jean. 

She laughed. 

" Try, then, and you'll see how it slips 
through your net." 

" Well, if you would like — " 

" I would like to see you catch some 
prawns — and nothing more— just at present." 

" You are cruel. Let us go farther ; there 
is nothing here." 

He offered her his hand to steady her on 
the greasy rocks. She leaned on it rather 
timidly ; and he, all at once, felt himself 
invaded by love, throbbing with desire, hun- 
gering for her, as if the passion that was 
germinating in him had waited for that day 
to burst forth. 

They soon arrived at a deeper crevice, 
where, beneath the rippling water flowing to 
the distant sea by an invisible fissure, long, 
fine, strangely colored seaweeds, with tresses 
of rose and green, floated as if they were 
swimming. 

Madame Rosemilly exclaimed : 

" Look, look, I see one — a big one, a very 
big one, down there ! " 

He perceived it, in turn, and went down 



Jean and Madame Rose'milly. 213 



into the crevice, although the water wet him 
to the waist. 

But the creature, moving its long feelers, 
quietly retired before the net. Jean drove it 
toward the wreck, sure of catching it there. 
When it found itself blockaded, it made a 
sudden dash over the net, crossed the pool, 
and disappeared. 

The young woman, who was watching in 
panting eagerness his attempt, could not 
refrain from crying : 

" Ah, clumsy ! " 

He was vexed, and, without thinking, 
dragged his net through a pool full of weeds. 
As he raised it to the surface, he saw in it 
three large transparent prawns, which had 
been blindly dragged from their invisible 
hiding place. 

He presented them in triumph to Madame 
Rosemilly, who dared not touch them for 
fear of the sharp, toothlike point which arms 
their heads. 

At last she decided to take them ; and seiz- 
ing between two of her fingers the thin end 
of their beard, she placed them, one after the 



214 Pierre and fean. 

other, in her basket, with some weed to keep 
them alive. Then, on finding a shallower 
piece of water, she entered it with hesitating 
steps, and catching her breath as the cold 
struck her feet, began to fish herself. She 
was skilful and cunning, with a supple wrist 
and a sportsman's instinct. Almost at every 
cast she brought out some victims, deceived 
and surprised by the ingenious slowness with 
which she swept the pool. 

Jean was taking nothing ; but he followed 
her step by step, touched her dress, bent over 
her, pretended to be in despair at his awk- 
wardness, and wished her to teach him. 

"Show me how," he said, " show me ! " 

Then as their two faces were reflected, one 
beside the other, in the clear water, which 
the deep-growing seaweeds formed into a 
limpid mirror, Jean smiled at the face so 
near his which looked up to him from below, 
and at times threw to it, from the tips of his 
fingers, a kiss which seemed to fall on it. 

" You are very tiresome," the young woman 
said. " My dear fellow, never do two things 
it the same time." 




LOOKING FOR I'KAWNS. 



Jean and Madame Rosimilly. 217 



He replied : 

" I am only doing one. I love you." 

She drew herself up erect, and in a serious 
tone : 

" Come, now. What is the matter with you 
for the last ten minutes ? Have you lost 
your head ? " 

" No, I have not lost my head. I love you, 
and at last dare to tell you so." 

They were now standing in the pool of 
sea-water that rose nearly to their knees, and, 
with their dripping hands leaning on their 
nets, looked into the depth of each other's 
eyes. 

She resumed in playful and rather annoyed 
tone : 

" You are badly advised to speak to 
me thus at this moment. Could you not 
wait another day, and not spoil my fish- 
ing ? " 

He replied : 

" Pardon me, but I could not keep silence. 
I have loved you a long time. To-day you 
have made me lose my senses." 

Then she seemed at once to take her reso- 



218 Pierre a?id Jean. 

lution, and to resign herself to talk business 
and renounce amusement. 

" Let us sit on this rock," she said : " we 
shall be able to talk quietly." 

They climbed on a rock a little higher ; and 
when they were settled, side by side, their 
feet hanging down in the full sunshine, she 
rejoined : 

" My friend, you are not a child, and I am 
not a girl. Both of us know what we are 
about, and can weigh all the consequences of 
our acts. If you decide to-day to declare 
your love to me, I suppose naturally you 
wish to marry me." 

He had scarcely expected such a clear 
statement of the situation, and answered 
sheepishly : 

" Why, yes ! " 

" Have you spoken to your father and 
mother ? " 

" No. I wished to know if you would 
accept me." 

She extended to him her hand, which was 
still wet, and as he placed his own in it with 
fervor : 



Jean and Madame Kose'niilly. 2 \ 9 

" I am willing," she said. " I believe you 
good and loyal. But do not forget that 1 
would not displease your parents." 

" Do you think that my mother has fore- 
seen nothing, and that she would love you as 
she does if she did not desire a marriage 
between us ? " 

" True ; I am rather confused." 

They were silent. On his part, he was 
astonished that she was so little confused and 
so reasonable. He expected some pretty 
airs and graces, refusals which say yes, a 
whole coquettish comedy of love blended 
with fishing and the splashing of water. And 
it was all over ; he felt himself bound and 
married in a score of words. They had 
nothing more to say to each other, since they 
were in full accord ; and they both now re- 
mained somewhat embarrassed at what had 
passed so rapidly between them, perhaps 
even somewhat confused, not daring to speak 
further, not daring to fish further, not know- 
ing what to do. 

The voice of M. Roland came to the 
rescue. 



220 Pierre and Jean. 

" This way, this way, young people ! Come 
and see Beausire. He is emptying the sea, 
the old fellow." 

The captain, indeed, had marvellous suc- 
cess. Wet up to the loins, he went from 
pool to pool, detecting at a glance the best 
spots, and with a slow, sure movement of his 
net searching every cavity beneath the sea- 
weeds. 

And the pretty, transparent prawns, of a 
light gray color, danced on the hollow of his 
hand when he took them with a quick gesture . 
to fling them into his basket. 

Madame Rosemilly, surprised and de- 
lighted, kept close to him, and imitated him 
as well as she could, forgetting almost her 
promise and Jean, who was dreamily follow- 
ing her, to abandon herself to the childish 
pleasures of collecting the little creatures 
beneath the floating grasses. 

Roland suddenly broke the silence by 
exclaiming : 

" Here is Madame Roland coming to join 
us." 

At first she had remained with Pierre on 



Jean and Madame Rose m illy. 221 



the beach, for neither of them had any desire 
to amuse themselves by running over the 
rocks and splashing themselves in the pools, 
and yet they hesitated about remaining to- 
gether. She was afraid of him, and her son 
was afraid of her and of himself — afraid of his 
cruelty which he could not master. 

They sat down then, near each other, on 
the shingle. 

Both, in the warm sunshine which the sea 
air tempered, in presence of the limitless and 
sweet horizon of blue water with silver reflec- 
tions — both thought at the same time, " How 
pleasant it would have been for us here, once 
on a time." 

She dared not speak to Pierre, for she 
knew that his answer would be harsh ; he 
dared not speak to his mother, for he knew, 
too, that in spite of himself he would speak 
rudely. 

He poked among the round pebbles with 
his cane, pushing and striking them. She, 
with wandering eyes, had taken in her fingers 
three or four little stones, which she passed 
from one hand to another by a slow, mechani- 



222 Pierre and Jean. 

cal movement. Her straying glances, as they 
moved at random before her, saw, in the mid- 
dle of the field of seaweed, her son Jean fishing 
with Madame Rosemilly. She followed them, 
watching their movements, and clearly com- 
prehending with her maternal instinct that 
they were not talking as in other days. She 
saw them bending side by side when they 
looked at each other in the water, standing 
erect, face to face, when they questioned 
their hearts, and then climbing to a seat on 
the rock to converse with each other. 

Their outlines stood out clearly defined, 
and seemed the only figures in the horizon, 
and in this wide expanse of sky, sea, and cliff 
they assumed the aspect of something grand 
and symbolic. 

Pierre also looked at them, and a hard 
laugh suddenly came from his lips. 

Without turning to him, Madame Roland 
said : 

" What is the matter ?" 

Still with his sardonic smile, he replied : 

" I'm taking a lesson. I am learning how 
men prepare to be cuckolds." 



Jean and Madame Rose'milh. 223 



She gave a start of anger and revolt, 
shocked at the word, exasperated at what she 
fancied she understood. 

" For whom do you mean that ? " 

" For Jean, by Jove ! It is comical to see 
them going on." 

She replied in a low voice, trembling with 
emotion : 

" O Pierre, how cruel you are ! That 
woman is uprightness itself. Your brother 
could not choose better." 

He laughed aloud, a forced, jesting laugh. 

" Ha, ha, ha ! Uprightness itself ! All 
women are uprightness itself, and all husbands 
cuckolds. Ha, ha, ha ! " 

She rose without replying and rapidly de- 
scended the slope of the shingle ; and at the 
risk of slipping, falling into the holes con- 
cealed by the weeds, or of breaking leg or 
arm, she went almost at a run across the 
shallows, without looking, straight before her, 
to her other son. 

Jean, seeing her approach, cried to her : 

" Well, mamma, have you made up your 
mind ? " 



224 Pierre and Jean. 



Without replying, she seized his arm, as to 
say, "Save me ! Protect me ! " 

He saw her trouble, and in great surprise : 

" How pale you are ! What is the mat- 
ter ?" 

" I nearly fell. I am timid on these 
rocks." 

Jean guided her, supported her, explained 
the sport, and tried to interest her. But as 
she scarcely listened, and as he felt a violent 
need of confiding in some one, he drew her 
aside, and in a low voice : 

" Guess what I have done." 

" Why — why — I cannot ! " 

" Guess." 

" I — I cannot." 

"Well, then, I have told Madame Rose- 
milly that I wanted to marry her." 

She made no reply ; her head was in a 
whirl, her soul distressed so that she could 
hardly understand. 

She repeated : 

" Marry her ? " 

" Yes. Have I done right ? She is charm- 
ing, is she not ? " 



Jean and Madame Rose 'm illy. 225 



" Yes, charming. You have done right." 
" Then you approve ? " 
" Yes, I approve." 

" How oddly you say that ! One might 
fancy that — that you were not pleased." 




" Oh, yes. I am — pleased." 

" Sure ? " 

" Quite sure." 

To prove it, she took him in her arms and 
kissed him with a mother's fondest kisses. 

Then, when she had wiped her eyes which 
had filled with tears, she perceived down on 
the beach a figure, prone like a corpse, with 
15 



226 Pierre and J ran. 

its face in the shingle. It was the other 
brother, Pierre, who was brooding in despair. 

She led her " little Jean " farther away 
still, quite to the water's edge, and they 
talked long about the marriage which lay so 
near his heart. 

The rising tide drove them toward the 
fishers, whom they rejoined, and the whole 
party regained the shore. They aroused 
Pierre, who pretended to be asleep ; and the 
dinner was long, and moistened with plenty 
of wine. 



VII. 



PIERRE DENOUNCES HIS MOTHER. 



VII. 

As they returned in the break, all the men, 
except Jean, were sleepy. Beausire and 
Roland dropped their heads every five min- 
utes on some neighboring shoulder, which 
shook them off with a shrug. They drew 
themselves up, stopped snoring, opened their 
eyes, and said, "Very fine weather," and 
then, almost immediately, fell on the other 
side. 

When Havre was reached, their drowsiness 
was so profound that they could scarcely 
shake it off ; and Beausire even refused to go 



230 Pierre and Jean. 

up to Jean's rooms, where tea was waiting 
them. He was left at his own door. 

The young lawyer, for the first time, was 
going to sleep in his apartments ; and he 
rejoiced, with a somewhat puerile joy, at the 
opportunity of showing, on this very evening, 
to the woman he was engaged to, the rooms 
she would soon occupy. 

The servant-girl had gone. Madame Ro- 
land had declared that she would boil the 
water and serve the tea, as she did not like 
servants to sit up, for fear of fire. 

No one except Madame Roland, her son, 
and the workmen had yet entered the rooms, 
so that the surprise might be complete when 
it was seen how pretty they were. 

When they entered the vestibule, Jean 
begged them to wait. He wished to light the 
candles and lamps ; and he left in darkness 
Madame Rosemilly, his father, and brother, 
till he exclaimed " Enter ! " and threw wide 
open both of the folding doors. 

The glass gallery, lighted by a chandelier, 
and glass globes of various colors concealed 
amid the palms, india-rubber trees, and 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 231 

flowers, seemed at first like a scene in a thea- 
tre. There was a pause of admiration, and 
Roland, marvelling at the luxury, felt a desire 
to clap his hands as at a transformation scene. 




They next entered the first parlor, a small 
room, hung with old-gold stuffs to match 
the chairs. The large room for the recep- 
tion of clients was very simple, of pale salmon 
color, and had a noble air. 

Jean sat down in the arm-chair before his 



232 Pierre and Jean. 

book-laden desk, and in a grave, rather 
forced voice, said : 

" Yes, madame, the authorities are explicit, 
and, with the consent which I have just an- 
nounced to you, give me absolute assurance, 
that within three months the affairs of which 
we have spoken will have a successful solu- 
tion." 

He looked at Madame Rosemilly, who 
smiled as she looked at Madame Roland, and 
Madame Roland took and pressed her hand. 

Jean was radiant, and, cutting a schoolboy 
caper, cried : 

" How well the voice carries ! This room 
would be excellent to speak in." 

He began to declaim : 

" If humanity alone, if that sentiment of 
natural sympathy which we feel for all suf- 
fering, was to be the ground of the acquittal 
which we ask from you, we should appeal, 
gentlemen of the jury, to your pity, to your 
hearts as fathers and as men ; but we have 
on our side justice, and it is the question 
of justice alone that we shall bring before 
you." 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 233 



Pierre looked at the rooms which might 
have been his, and was irritated at the child's 
play of his brother, considering him decid- 
edly silly and witless. 

Madame Roland opened a door to the 
right. 

" This is the bedroom," she said. 

In arranging it, she had lavished all her 
maternal affection. The hangings were of 
cretonne in imitation of the old Norman 
stuff. A Louis Quinze design, a shepherdess 
in a medallion held by the kissing bills of 
two doves, gave the walls, curtains, bed, and 
chairs the gallant air of one of Watteau's 
fetes champetres. 

" It is charming,'' cried Madame Rose- 
milly, who became rather serious as she 
entered this room. 

" Do you like it ? " asked Jean. 

" Excessively ! " 

" If you only knew how glad I am ! " 
They exchanged a momentary glance, with 
confidence and tenderness in the depth of 
their eyes. 

Still she was somewhat put out, somewhat 



234 Pierre and Jean. 

confused, in this sleeping-room, which was to 
be her nuptial chamber. She had noticed, 
on entering, that the bed was very large, a 
genuine family affair, chosen by Madame 
Roland, who had without doubt foreseen and 
desired the approaching marriage of her son ; 
and this maternal foresight gave her pleasure, 
for it seemed to say they were expecting her 
to be one of the family. 

When they had returned to the parlor, 
Jean suddenly opened the door to the left 
and displayed the round dining-room, with 
three windows and Japanese decorations. 
Mother and son had there lavished all the 
fancy of which they were capable. This 
room, with its bamboo furniture, images, 
plaques, gold-embroidered silks, its trans- 
parent blinds in which beads of glass seemed 
drops of water, its fans nailed to the walls to 
hold up tapestry, its screens, its swords, its 
masques, its cranes with real feathers, all its 
little knick-knacks of porcelain, wood, ivory, 
paper, mother-of-pearl, and bronze, had that 
pretentious stiff look which awkward hands 
and ignorant eyes give to things which re- 




JEAN S ROOMS. 



Pierre Denounces His Mother, 237 

quire the highest degree of tact, taste, and 
artistic education. Yet this room was the 
most admired. Pierre only took some excep- 
tions, with a rather bitter irony, at which his 
brother was hurt. 

The table was decked with fruits in pyra- 
mids, and cakes piled into monuments. 

They were hardly to be called hungry. 
They sucked the fruit, and nibbled at the 
pastry, rather than eat them ; and then, after 
the lapse of an hour, Madame Rosemilly 
demanded permission to retire. 

It was resolved that M. Roland should 
escort her to her door, and he left with her 
at once ; while Madame Roland, in the ab- 
sence of the servant, cast a housekeeper's 
eye over the apartment to see that nothing 
was wanting. 

" Must I come back for you ? " Roland 
asked. 

She replied after some hesitation : 

" No, my dear, go to bed. Pierre will 
bring me home." 

When they had departed, she blew out 
the wax candles, locked up the cakes, 



238 Pierre and Jean. 

the sugar, and the liquors in a cupboard, 
the key of which she gave to Jean. Then 
she passed into the bedroom, turned down 
the bed, and saw if the carafe was filled 
with fresh water, and the windows securely 
closed. 

Pierre and Jean remained in the smaller 
room ; the latter still sore at his brother's 
criticism on his taste, the former more and 
more irritated at seeing his brother in these 
apartments. 

They both sat down and smoked without 
speaking. Suddenly Pierre exclaimed : 

" By George, the widow looked pretty well 
washed out this evening ; seaside excursions 
do not suit her." 

Jean felt himself seized at once with one 
of those sudden and furious fits of wrath 
which seize good-natured men when wounded 
to the heart. 

His breath failed him, so strong was his 
emotion, as he stammered out : 

" For the future, do not let me hear you 
say ' the widow ' when you are speaking of 
Madame Rosemilly." 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 23Q 

Pierre turned haughtily to him : 

" You are giving me orders, it seems. Are 
you becoming mad ? " 

Jean drew himself up : 

" I am not becoming mad, but I have had 
enough of your manners to me." 

Pierre gave a grin. 

" To you ? Are you going to fight Madame 
Rosemilly's battles ? " 

" Madame Rosemilly is going to be my 
wife ! " 

The other laughed still louder. 

" Ha, ha ! Very good. Now I see why 
I must not call her 'the widow.' You have, 
however, taken a very odd way of announc- 
ing your marriage to me." 

" No jesting — I won't have it. Do you 
hear ? I won't have it ! " 

Jean came up to him, pale and with trem- 
bling voice, exasperated at the irony with 
which his brother pursued the woman whom 
he loved and had chosen. 

All at once Pierre became just as furious ; 
all his impotent wrath, all the bitterness that 
he had kept down, all the rebellious feelings 



240 Pierre and Jean. 

he had crushed, and all his silent despair, 
flew to his head like a congestion of the 
brain. 

" You dare to talk thus ? You dare ? Be 
silent, I say ! Those are my orders, mine, do 
you hear ? Those are mine ! 

Jean, surprised at this violence, was silent 
for a few seconds, searching, in that con- 
fusion of mind into which rage throws us, 
for the idea, the phrase, the word which 
would pierce his brother to the heart. 

He struggled to gain the mastery over 
himself in order to give a better blow ; and 
speaking slowly, to make his words more 
cutting, he resumed : 

" It is a long time now since I have known 
you have been jealous of me ; ever since the 
day when you began to say ' the widow ' 
because you knew it annoyed me." 

Pierre burst into one of his usual peals of 
harsh and insulting laughter. 

" Ha, ha ! My God ! Jealous of you ? 
Me jealous of you ? Me ! Me ! Good God, 
why ? For what reason ? — your brains or 
your looks ? " 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 241 

Jean felt that he had touched the wound 
to the quick. 

" Yes. You are jealous of me, jealous 
since childhood ; and you became uncon- 
trollable when you saw this lady prefer me, 
while she would have nothing to say to you." 

Pierre stammered, so exasperated was he 
at the supposition : 

" Me ! — me jealous of you ! On account 
of that silly doll — that plump little goose ! " 

Jean saw his blows told, and continued : 

" And the day when you tried to outrow 
me in the Pearl ? All that you said in her 
presence, to show yourself off ? Why, you are 
dying of jealousy ! When this fortune came 
to me, you became frantic, you detested me, 
and showed it in every way. You have made 
us all miserable. There is not an hour when 
you do not spit out the bile that is choking 
you." 

Pierre doubled up his hands in rage, and 
in an irresistible longing to rush at his 
brother and seize him by the throat. 

" Silence, now ! Don't speak of that for- 
tune. " 

16 



242 Pierre and Jean. 

Jean cried : 

" Why, jealousy is exuding from every 
pore of your skin. You cannot say a word 
to my father, my mother, or me, without let- 
ting it burst out. You pretend to despise me, 
because you are jealous ! You pick quarrels 
with everybody, because you are jealous ! 
And now when I am rich, you can contain 
yourself no longer : you have become ven- 
omous, you torture our mother as if it were 
her fault ! " 

Pierre recoiled to the mantelpiece, his 
mouth half open, his eyes dilated, a prey to 
one of those paroxysms of rage which lead 
to crime. 

He repeated in a lower, panting voice : 

" Silence, I say, silence ! " 

" No ! For a long time I have wanted to 
tell you what I thought. You have given 
me an opportunity : so much the worse for 
you ! There is a woman I love : you know it, 
and ridicule her in my presence. You drive 
me to extremity : so much the worse for 
you ! But I will crush your viper fangs. I 
will force you to respect me." 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 243 

" Respect you — you ! " 

" Yes, me ! " 

" Respect you — you ! who have dishon- 
ored us all by your greed ! 

" What do you say ? Say it again ! Say 
it again ! " 

" I say one does not accept the fortune 
of one man when one passes for the son of 
another." 

Jean remained motionless, without com- 
prehension, dazed at the insinuation of which 
he had a presentiment. 

" What ! You say — Say it once more ! " 

" I say all the world is chattering, all the 
world is gossiping, that you are the son of the 
man who left you his fortune. Well, a decent 
son does not accept the wealth which dis- 
honors his mother." 

"Pierre — Pierre — Pierre — do you think 
so ? Is it you — you, who utter such an 
infamy ? " 

" Yes, it is I. Do not you see that 1 am 
dying of chagrin for more than a month ; that 
I pass my nights without sleeping, and my 
days in hiding myself like a wild beast ; that 



244 Pierre and Jean. 

I do not know what I am saying or doing, 
nor what will become of me, so wretched 
am I, so crazed with shame and grief ? for 
what was at first a surmise is knowledge 
now." 

" Pierre, be silent ! Mamma is in the next 
room. Remember, she may hear us — she 
does hear us ! " 

But he had to empty his heart. He told 
everything, his suspicions, his arguments, his 
struggles, his conviction, and the story of the 
portrait that had again disappeared. 

He spoke in short, mangled phrases, almost 
incoherently, like a victim to hallucination. 

He seemed to have forgotten Jean, and his 
mother in the next room. He spoke as if 
no one heard him, because he had to speak, 
because he had suffered so much, and had so 
sternly compressed and closed his wound. It 
had swelled like a tumor, and the tumor was 
about to burst and bespatter all around. He 
began to walk about, as he nearly always did, 
his eyes fixed before him, gesticulating in a 
frenzy of despair, with sobs in his throat. With 
a return of horror of himself, he spoke as if 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 245 



he would confess his wretchedness and the 
wretchedness of his family, as if he would 
have flung his pain to the deaf and invisible 
air which carried away his words. 

Jean, distracted and almost convinced at 
once by the blind energy of his brother, leaned 
against the door, behind which he guessed 
that their mother had heard them. 

She could not get out without passing 
through the parlor. She had not come back : 
therefore, she dared not. 

With a sudden stamp of his foot Pierre 
cried : 

" Ah, what a beast I am to have talked 
like this ! " 

And he rushed bareheaded on to the stair- 
case. 

The noise of the street door, as it closed 
with a bang, roused Jean from the deep 
stupor in which he had sunk. Some seconds 
passed, seconds longer than some hours, and 
his soul lay benumbed in the dulness of 
idiocy. He felt that he must, at once, think 
and act ; but without even the wish to un- 
derstand or know or recall his sense, he 



246 Pierre and Jean. 

delayed out of fear, weakness, and cowardice. 
He belonged to that race of temporizers 
who put everything off till to-morrow ; and, 
when he had to take a resolution on the 
spot, he still instinctively sought to gain a few 
moments. 

But the profound silence which now sur- 
rounded him after the loud exclamations of 
Pierre, this sudden silence of the walls and 
the furniture, with the bright gleam of the six 
candles and two lamps, struck him with such 
a shock that he longed to run away like his 
brother. 

Then he shook together his thoughts ; he 
shook together his feelings, and tried to 
think. 

He had never encountered such a difficulty 
in his life. He was one of the men who let 
themselves drift like running water. He 
had been a good scholar in the class-room to 
avoid punishment, and had finished his legal 
studies with regularity because his life was 
calm. Everything in the world appeared to 
him natural, without otherwise awakening 
his attention. He loved order, prudence, 



Pierre Denounces His Mot iter. 247 



and repose by temperament, as his soul had 
neither crease nor wrinkle ; and he remained 
in face of this catastrophe, like a man who 
falls into the water without ever having 
learned to swim. 

At first he attempted to doubt his brother. 
Had he lied from hatred or from jealousy ? 

And yet, how could he have been such a 
wretch as to speak thus of their mother, if 
he had not himself been frenzied by despair ? 
But Jean still heard in his ears, still saw 
with his eyes, still felt in his nerves, in his 
inmost flesh, certain words, certain cries of 
suffering, some intonations and gestures of 
Pierre, that were so full of anguish as to be 
irresistible, as irrefutable as certitude. 

He was too crushed to make a movement 
or have a will. His distress became intoler- 
able ; and he felt that, behind the door, was 
his mother, who had heard all and waited 
for him. 

What was she doing ? Not a movement, 
not a stir, not a breath, not a sigh, revealed 
the presence of a human being behind those 
boards. Had she fled? But how ? If she 



248 Pierre and Jean. 

had fled, she must have leaped from the 
window into the street. 

A start of terror seized him so sudden and 
so imperious that he burst open, rather than 
opened, the door, and rushed into his bed- 
room. 

It seemed empty. A single candle on the 
dressing-table lighted it. 

Jean dashed to the window: it was fastened, 
and the shutters closed. He returned and 
scrutinized with anxious looks all the dark 
corners. He saw that the bed-curtains were 
drawn ; he ran and opened them. His 
mother was stretched on the couch, her 
face buried in the pillow, which, with two 
clutching hands, she held on her head, in 
order to hear no more. 

At first he thought she was suffocated ; 
then, taking her by the shoulders, he turned 
her round, without her ever letting go of the 
pillow which hid her face, and which she bit 
to stop her cries. 

But the touch of this stiffened body and 
of these clutching arms communicated to him 
the shock of her unspeakable torture. The 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 249 

energy and force with which she held, by 
hands and teeth, the feather pillow over her 
mouth, her ears, and her eyes, that he might 
not see her or speak to her, made him divine, 
by the shock he received, to what point it is 
possible to suffer. His heart, his simple 
heart, was torn with pity. He was not a 
judge, not even a compassionate judge : he 
was a man full of weakness, and a son full of 
tenderness. He recalled nothing the other 
had said, he did not argue, he did not dis- 
cuss : only he touched with his two hands the 
inert body of his mother, and, as he could 
not pull the pillow from her face, he cried, 
while he kissed her dress : 

" Mamma, mamma, my poor mamma ! 
Look at me ! 

She would have seemed lifeless, if an 
almost imperceptible shiver, a vibration as of 
a stretched cord, had not quivered through 
all her limbs. He repeated : 

" Mamma, mamma, listen to me. It is not 
true. I am sure it is not true." 

A spasm of suffocation was followed by 
sudden sobs in the pillow. Then all her 



250 Pierre and Jean. 

nerves relaxed, the rigid muscles became 
pliant, the fingers unclasped and left the 
pillow, and Jean raised it from her face. 

She was quite pale, quite bleached, and 
from her closed eyelids drops of water were 
flowing. Throwing his arms around her 
neck, he kissed her eyes with long kisses of 
despair, that were moistened with her tears, 
and kept saying : 

''Mamma, dear mamma, I am sure it is 
not true. Don't cry. I know it is not true." 

She rose and sat up ; she looked at him, 
and with one of those efforts of courage 
which are required, in certain cases, to kill 
one's self, she said to him : 

" No : it is true, my child ! " 

They remained, without a word, face to 
face. For some minutes she was still chok- 
ing, stretching her neck, and throwing back 
her head to breathe. At length she mastered 
herself and resumed : 

" It is true, my child. Why tell lies ? It is 
true. You would not believe me if I did lie." 

She looked like a madwoman. Overcome 
with terror, he fell on his knees beside the bed. 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 253 

" Oh, be silent, mamma, be silent ! " 

She rose up with appalling resolution and 
energy. 

" I have nothing more to tell you, my 
child. Farewell ! " 

And she walked toward the door. He 
seized her with both arms, crying : 

" What are you doing, mamma ? Where 
are you going ? " 

" I do not know. How can I know ? I 
have nothing more to do, for I am all alone." 

She struggled to escape ; and he, still hold- 
ing her, could find only one word to say, 
over and over again : 

" Mamma, mamma, mamma ! " 

In the midst of her efforts to break his 
clasp, she said : 

" No, no, I am no more your mother ! I 
am nothing more to you, nor to any one, 
nothing more, nothing more ! You have 
no longer father or mother, my poor child ! 
Farewell ! " 

He understood now that if he let her go he 
would never see her again : so, raising her in 
his arms, he carried her to an arm-chair, and 



254 Pierre and Jean. 

forced her to sit there. Then kneeling, and 
forming a chain around her with his arms, he 
said : 

'' You shall not leave here, mamma. I love 
you and will keep you. I will keep you 
always. You are mine ! " 

In a low, weak voice she replied : 

" No, my poor child, that is not possible. 
This evening you weep : to-morrow you 
would turn me out. You would not pardon 
me, either." 

He answered with such a grand burst of 
sincere love : " What, I ? How little you 
know me ! " that she gave a cry, took his 
head by the hair with both hands, pulled 
him violently to her, and kissed him wildly. 

Then she remained motionless, her cheek 
against her son's cheek, feeling through his 
thick beard the warmth of his young life, and 
said, low in his ear : 

" No, my little Jean. You would not par- 
don me to-morrow. You think so, and you 
are mistaken. You have pardoned me this 
evening, and that pardon has saved my life ; 
but you must not see me again." 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 255 

He repeated, clasping her tighter : 

" Mamma, do not say that ! " 

" Yes, little one, I must go away. I do 
not know when, nor how I shall act, nor 
what I shall say. But it must be so. I 
would not dare to look at you or embrace 
you any more. Do you understand ? " 

Then in his turn he said, low in her ear : 

" Darling mother, you will remain because 
I wish it, and have need of you. And you 
must swear to obey me at once." 

" No, my child." 

"O mamma, you must! Do you hear? 
You must ! " 

" No, my child, it is impossible. It would 
condemn us all to hell. I know, I have 
known for a month, what that torture is. 
You are softened at this moment ; but when it 
is past, when you look at me as Pierre does, 
when you recall what I have said to you — 
Oh, my little Jean — think — think that I am 
your mother ! " 

" You must not quit me, mamma. I have 
only you." 

" But think, my son, we can never see each 



256 Pierre and Jean. 

other again without blushing, both of us ; 
without my feeling ready to die of shame, 
and without your eyes making mine sink." 

" This is not true, mamma." 

" Yes, yes, yes. It is true ! Oh, I under- 
stand all the struggles of your poor brother, 
all of them, from the first day ! Now, when I 
hear his step in the house, my heart leaps as 
if it would burst my breast ; when I hear his 
voice, I feel as if I would faint. I had you 
still ! You ! Now I have you no longer. 
Oh, my little Jean, do you think I could live 
between you two ? " 

" Yes, mamma. I will love you so much 
that you will not think of it more." 

" Oh, if that was possible ! " 

'' It is possible ! " 

" How can I not think of it, with you and 
your brother here ? Will neither of you think 
of it ?" 

" I will not, I swear ! " 

" You will think of it every hour of the day." 

" No, I swear, no. And then, listen, if you 
go away, I'll pick a quarrel and get myself 
killed."' 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 257 

She was distracted at the childish threat, 
and clasped Jean fondly, as she caressed him 
with passionate tenderness. 

He continued : 

" I love you more than you think, much 
more, much more. Come, be reasonable. Try 
to stop here only a week. Will you promise 
for a week ? You cannot refuse me that ! " 

She laid her hands on Jean's shoulders, and 
holding him at arm' ; length : 

" My child, let us be calm, and not be 
carried away by affection. Let me speak to 
you, in the first place. If I should hear, 
once only, from your lips what I have heard 
for a month from your brother's mouth ; if I 
were, once only, to read in your eyes what I 
read in his ; if I were to surmise, by a mere 
word, a mere look, that I am as hateful to 
you as to him — one hour afterwards, you 
understand, one hour afterwards, I would 
leave forever." 

" Mamma, I swear it." 

" Let me speak. For a month I have 
suffered all that can be suffered. From the 
moment when I comprehended that your 
17 



258 Pierre and Jean. 



brother, my other son, suspected me, and 
that he was, minute by minute, coming nearer 
to the truth, every moment of my life has 
been a torment impossible to describe." 

Her voice was so full of anguish that the 
contagion of her torture brought tears to the 
eyes of Jean. 

He attempted to kiss her, but she repulsed 
him. 

" Leave me alone. Listen — I have so 
much to tell you to let you understand. 
Hut you will not understand — that is, if I 
should stay— you must— No, I cannot ! " 

" Speak, mamma, speak ! " 

" I will, then. At least, I will not have 
deceived you. You want me to stay with 
you, do you not ? For me to stay, for us 
to be able to see each other still, to speak to 
each other, to meet each other all day in the 
house— for I dare not now open a door for 
fear of finding your brother behind it — for all 
this, it is necessary not for you to pardon me 
— nothing is worse than a pardon — but that 
you bear me no ill will for what I have done. 
You must feel yourself so strong, so different 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 259 

from all the world, as to say you are not the 
son of Roland without blushing at the avowal 
and without despising me. I have suffered 
enough — I have suffered too much. I can 
bear no more. No, I can bear no more. And 
1 have suffered, not from yesterday, but for a 
long while. — You will never be able to under- 
stand. — That we may still live together, still 
embrace each other, my little Jean, say to 
yourself, that, if I was your father's mistress, I 
was still more his wife, his true wife — there is 
no shame for it in my heart ; that I regret 
nothing ; that I still love him, dead as he is. 
that I shall love him always, that 1 loved none 
but him ; that he was all my life, all my joy, 
all my hope, all my consolation, all, all, all 
to me, ah, for so long ! Listen, little one. 
Before God, who hears me, I would have had 
nothing good in life, if I had not met him 
—nothing ; never affection, never kindness, 
never one of those hours that make us so 
regret that we grow old — nothing ! I owe 
to him everything. I had only him in the 
world, and then you two, your brother and 
you. Without you it would have been void, 



260 Pierre and Jean. 

black and void as night. I would have loved 
nothing, known nothing, desired nothing — I 
would not have even wept ; for I have wept, 
my little Jean — yes, I have wept since we came 
here. I gave myself to him, body and soul, for- 
ever, with happiness ; and for ten years I was 
his wife, as he was my husband, before God, 
who made us for each other. And then I 
perceived that he loved me less. He was 
always good and thoughtful, but I was no 
longer to him what I had been. It was over. 
Oh, how I wept ! What a wretched deceiver 
is life ! Nothing lasts ! — And we came 
here, and I never saw him again ; he never 
came here. He promised in all his letters 
— I always expected him — and I never saw 
him again — and now he is dead. But he 
still loved us, for he thought of you. As for 
me, I shall love him to my last breath, and 
will never deny him ; and I love you because 
you are his child, and I could not be 
ashamed of him before you. Do you un- 
derstand ? I could not ! If you wish me to 
stay, you must accept being his son, and we 
must talk of him sometimes, and you must 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 26 1 

love him a little, and we must think of him 
when we look at each other. If you will not, 
if you cannot do this, farewell, my little Jean, 
it is impossible for us to remain together. I 
will do as you decide." 

Jean replied, in a gentle voice : 

" Stay, mamma." 

She clasped him in her arms, and began 
to weep afresh ; then, cheek pressed to cheek, 
she resumed : 

" Yes, but Pierre, what can we do with 
him ? " 

Jean whispered : 

"We will find something. You cannot 
live any longer near him." 

The remembrance of her eldest son shook 
her with anguish. 

" No, I cannot, I cannot." 

And flinging herself on Jean's heart, she 
cried in distress of soul : 

" Save me from him, save me, little Jean. Do 
something. I do not know — find — save me ! " 

" Yes, mamma ; I will see about it." 

"At once — you must — at once — do not 
leave me ! I am in fear of him — such fear ! " 



262 Picric and Jean. 

" Yes, I will find something, I promise 
you." 

" But quickly, quickly ! You do not know 
how I feel when I see him." 

Then she whispered low in his ear : 

" Keep me here, at your rooms." 

He hesitated, reflected, and with his posi- 
tive good sense comprehended the clanger of 
such an arrangement. 

But he had to reason for a long time, and 
to discuss and combat with definite argu- 
ments her terror and distraction. 

'Only this evening," she said. " Only 
to-night. You can tell Roland to-morrow 
that I was unwell." 

" That is not possible, as Pierre has re- 
turned. Come, take courage. I will arrange 
everything, after to-morrow, I promise you. 
I will be at the house at nine o'clock. Come, 
put on your bonnet ; I will take you home." 

" I will do as you wish," she said with 
childish resignation, in timid gratitude. 

She attempted to rise, but the shock had 
been too great — she could not yet stand up. 

He gave her some eau sucre'e to drink, and 



Pierre Denounces His Mother. 263 

some salts to smell, and bathed her temples 
with vinegar. 

At length she could walk, and took bis 
arm. Three o'clock was striking when they 
passed the town hall. 

At the door of their dwelling he kissed 
her and said, "Adieu, mamma. Courage ! " 

With furtive steps she mounted the silent 
stairs, reached her room, undressed rapidly, 
and, with the emotion of her old adulteries 
revived, crept into the bed where Roland 
was snoring. 

Pierre, alone in the house, was not asleep 
and heard her return. 




VIII. 
PIERRE RESOLVES TO FLY 



VIII. 

On returning to his room, Jean flung him- 
self on a couch ; for the grief and anxiety 
which inspired in his brother a longing to 
run away, and fly like a hunted thing, had a 
different effect on his somnolent nature, and 
crippled his every limb. He felt himself 
weak beyond the power of movement, beyond 
the power of getting into bed ; weak in body 
and soul, crushed and desolate. He was not, 
as Pierre was, smitten in the purity of his 
filial love, in that secret dignity in which 
proud spirits wrap themselves : he was over- 



268 Pierre and Jean. 

whelmed by a stroke of fate, that at the same 
time menaced his dearest interests. 

When at length his mind grew calm, when 
his thoughts had cleared themselves like 
water that had been disturbed and troubled, 
he faced the situation that had just been re- 
vealed to him. If he had learned the secret 
of his birth in any other manner, he would 
assuredly have been indignant, and experi- 
enced deep grief ; but after his quarrel with 
his brother, and after the violent and brutal 
revelation that shook his nerves, the poignant 
emotion of his mother's confession left him 
without energy to revolt. The shock received 
by his sensitive nature had been strong 
enough to sweep away, in irresistible com- 
miseration, all the prejudices and all the 
sacred susceptibilities of natural morality. 

Besides, he was not a man made to resist. 
He did not like to struggle against any one, 
still less against himself, and therefore he 
became resigned ; and then, by an instinctive 
inclination, an innate love of repose and of 
quiet, pleasant life, he began to be disquieted 
about the annoyances which would rise 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 269 

around him, and at the same time reach 
him. He saw that they were inevitable ; and, 
to remove them, he resolved on superhuman 
efforts of energy and activity. It was neces- 
sary that at once, the very next day, the 
difficulty must be cut ; for he had, likewise, 
at times, that imperious need of immediate 
solution which constitutes all the force of the 
weak, who are incapable of a protracted 
power to will. His lawyer's turn of mind, 
trained, besides, to disentangle and study 
complicated situations and questions of 
domestic order in disturbed households, at 
once discovered all the immediate conse- 
quences of his brother's state of mind. In 
spite of himself, he faced the results from 
a professional point of view, as if he were 
arranging the future relations of clients after 
a moral catastrophe. 

Beyond question, constant contact with 
Pierre became impossible. He could easily 
avoid him by remaining in his rooms, but it 
was also impossible that their mother should 
continue to reside under the same roof as her 
elder son. 



270 Pierre and Jean. 

His meditations were long, as he lay 
motionless on the cushions, forming and 
rejecting plans, without finding anything to 
satisfy him. 

Then suddenly this idea struck him : 
" Could an honest man keep the fortune he 
had received ? " 

He replied to himself at first, " No," and 
resolved to give it to some charity. It was 
hard : so much the worse. He would sell 
his furniture, and work like any one else, as 
all have to work when beginning. This manly 
and painful determination roused his cour- 
age, and he rose and leaned his forehead 
against the window-pane. He had been 
poor ; he would be poor again. After all, he 
would not die of it. He looked at the gas 
lamp in front of him on the other side of the 
street. Then, as a belated woman passed 
along the footpath, he suddenly thought of 
Madame Rosemilly, and received in his heart 
the shock of the profound emotions which are 
engendered in us by a cruel thought. All 
the desperate consequences of his decision 
appeared to him at once. He ought to re- 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 271 



nounce his marriage with her, renounce happi- 
ness, renounce everything. Could he do so 
now that he was engaged to her ? She had 
accepted him with the knowledge that he was 
rich. If he were poor she would still accept 
him ; but had he the right to ask this from 
her, and impose on her this sacrifice ? Would 
it not be better to keep this money as a trust, 
which he would hereafter restore to the indi- 
gent ? 

In his soul, where egotism assumed honest 
masks, all these disguised interests struggled 
and fought. His first scruples gave way to 
ingenious reasonings, then reappeared, and 
then were again effaced. 

He sat down again, searching for some 
decisive motive, some all-powerful pretext, to 
fix his hesitations and convince his native 
integrity. A score of times already had he 
asked himself the question : " Since I am 
this man's son ; since I know it and accept 
the situation, is it not natural to accept also 
his legacy?" This argument, however, could 
not stifle the " No " whispered by his deepest 
conscience. 



272 Pierre and Jean. 

Then he suddenly thought: " Since I am 
not the son of him whom I thought my father, 
I can accept nothing from him, neither in 
his life, nor after his death. That would not 
be either noble or just ; it would be robbing 
my brother." 

This new manner of looking at it com- 
forted him and quieted his conscience, and 
he went back to the window. 

" Yes," he said to himself, " I must renounce 
the inheritance of my family. I must leave 
it whole and entire to Pierre, since I am not 
the son of his father. That is but just. Is 
it not just then, also, that I keep the money 
of my own father ? " 

Recognizing then that he could not take 
any share in Roland's fortune, and deciding to 
abandon it in its integrity, he consented and 
resigned himself to keep that left by Mare- 
chal; for, if he rejected both, he would find 
himself reduced to simple beggary. 

This delicate affair being once settled, he 
returned to the question of Pierre's presence 
in the family. How to get rid of him ? He 
was despairing of finding a practical solution, 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 



2 73 



when the whistle of a steamer coming into 
port seemed to reply, by suggesting to him 
an idea. 

Upon this he stretched himself, without 




undressing, on his bed, and lay till daylight 
in broken dreams. 

About nine o'clock he went out to ascer- 
tain if the execution of his project was pos- 
sible ; then, after some business matters and 
calls, he betook himself to the house of his 



274 Pierre and Jean. 

parents. His mother was waiting for him in 
her bedroom. 

" If you had not come," she said, " I would 
never have dared to go down." 

Roland was soon heard calling on the 
stairs : 

" Nothing to eat to-day, eh ? Confound it ! " 

There was no reply, so he bellowed : 

" Josephine, confound it all ! what are you 
about ? " 

The girl's voice came up from the depths 
of the basement : 

" What is it, sir ? " 

" \V here's your mistress ? " 

" She is up- stairs with M. Jean." 

He raised his head toward the upper 
story, and shouted : 

" Louise ! " 

Madame Roland half opened the door, 
and replied : 

" Well ? " 

" Are we to have nothing to eat ? Dog- 
gone it ! " 

" We are coming, my dear." 

She descended, and Jean followed. 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 275 

Roland, when he saw the young man, 
cried : 

" Ah, there you are ! You are already 
bored with your lodgings." 

" No, father, but I had to speak with 
mamma this morning." 

Jean advanced with outstretched hand, 
and when he felt in his fingers the paternal 
grasp of the old man, a strange unforeseen 
emotion wrung him — the emotion of sepa- 
rations and farewells beyond the hope of 
return. 

Madame Roland inquired : 

" Has not Pierre come ? " 

Her husband shrugged his shoulders. 

"No, so much the worse ; he is always 
late. Let us begin without him." 

She turned to Jean. 

" You ought to go and look for him, my 
child. It hurts him when we do not wait 
for him." 

The young man left the room. He 
mounted the stairs with the feverish reso- 
lution of a craven who is going to fight. 

He knocked at the door. Pierre replied : 



276 Pierre and Jean. 

" Come in ! " 

He entered the room. 

His brother was bending over the table 
and writing. 

" Good-morning," said Jean. 

Pierre rose. 

" Good-morning." 

And they shook hands as if nothing had 
happened. 

" Are you not coming down to breakfast ? " 

" Well, the fact is, I have a deal to do." 

The voice of the older brother trembled, 
and his anxious eye asked the younger one 
what he was about to do. 

" They're waiting for you." 

" Oh, is — is our mother down there ? " 

" Yes. She herself sent me to look for 
you." 

"Then I'll come down." 

He hesitated at the dining-room door 
whether he should show himself first. Then 
he opened it with a jerk, and saw his father 
and mother seated at table, opposite each 
other. 

He went up to her without raising his eyes 




THE MAID-SEKVAN'I 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 279 

or pronouncing a word, and bending toward 
her offered her his brow to kiss as he had 
been doing for some time past, in place of 
kissing her on the cheek as in old times. 
He guessed that her lips approached him, 
but he did not feel them on his brow, and he 
straightened himself up with beating heart 
after this ghost of a kiss. 

He asked himself : " What did they say 
after I left ? " 

Jean affectionately repeated the words 
"mother" and "dear mamma," and paid 
her great attention, handing her dishes and 
pouring out her wine. Pierre then compre- 
hended that they had wept together, but he 
could not penetrate their thoughts. Did 
Jean believe his mother guilty, or his brother 
a scoundrel ? 

All the reproaches which he had heaped 
on himself for having uttered the horrible 
charge assailed him afresh, choking his 
throat, closing his mouth, and preventing 
him from eating or speaking. 

He was attacked, at this moment, by an 
intolerable need of flying, quitting the house 



280 Pierre and Ject7i. 

which was no longer his, and the people who 
were bound to him now only by imperceptible 
bonds. He would have liked to have gone 
away at once, no matter where ; for he felt 
all was over— that he could no longer remain 
among them, that he would torture them 
always, in spite of himself, by his mere pres- 
ence, and that they would make him suffer 
an intolerable punishment. 

Jean was talking ; he was in conversation 
with Roland, but Pierre did not listen or 
understand it. He fancied, however, that 
there was a meaning in his brother's tones, 
and took note of the sense of the words. 

Jean said : 

" It will be, it seems, the finest boat in 
their fleet. They say six thousand five hun- 
dred tons. It will make its first voyage next 
month." 

Roland exclaimed in surprise : 

" So soon ! I thought she would not be 
fit to go to sea this summer." 

" Excuse me. The work has been pushed 
on so vigorously that the first trip will take 
place before the fall. I was this morning 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 281 

at the company's office, and spoke to one of 
the managers." 

" Which of them ? " 

" M. Marchand, a particular friend of the 
president of the board of directors." 

" Why, do you know him ? " 

" Yes. And I had a slight favor to ask." 

" Then you will take me to go over the 
Lorraine when she comes into harbor, won't 
you ? " 

"Certainly. Nothing easier." 

Jean seemed to hesitate, pick his phrases, 
and change his subjects inexplicably. He 
continued : 

" In brief, life on board these great Atlan- 
tic steamers is very pleasant. More thai, 
half of the month is spent ashore in two 
superb cities, New York and Havre, and the 
rest afloat with charming people. Very agree- 
able acquaintances can be made there, and 
very useful ones, too — very useful later on — 
among the passengers. Fancy, the captain, 
if he is economical with his coal, can make- 
twenty-five thousand francs a year, if not 
more." 



282 Pierre and Jean. 

" Phew ! " exclaimed Roland, with a long 
whistle that bore witness to a profound respect 
for the sum and the captain. 

Jean resumed : 

" The purser can make ten thousand, and 
the doctor has five thousand, fixed salary, 
with board, lodging, lights, heat, attendance, 
etc., etc. This is equal to ten thousand, at 
least. A good berth." 

Pierre, who had raised his eyes, met those 
of his brother and understood him. 

He asked, after a little hesitation : 

" Is it difficult to obtain a place as doctor 
on one of these steamers ? " 

" Yes and no. It all depends on circum- 
stances and influence." 

There was a long silence, then the doctor 
spoke again : 

" Is it next week that the Lorraine sails ? " 

" Yes ; the 7th." 

They were again silent. 

Pierre's thoughts were : It would be cer- 
tainly a solution of the difficulty if he could 
go as a doctor on this steamer. Afterwards 
he would see — he would leave it, perhaps. 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 283 

Meanwhile, he would earn his living without 
asking anything from his family. He had 
been forced, the night before, to sell his 
watch, for now he asked nothing from his 
mother. He had, save this, no resource, no 
means of eating any other bread than that of 
the house where he was no longer at home, 
no means of sleeping in another bed and 
under another roof. So he said, hesitating 
a little : 

" If I could manage it, I should be very 
glad to sail on board her." 

" Why cannot you ? " asked Jean. 

" Because I know no one in the Trans- 
atlantic Company." 

Roland, in stupid amazement, asked : 

" All your fine projects of success — what's 
to become of them ? " 

Pierre replied : 

" There are times when we must learn to 
sacrifice everything, and renounce our dear- 
est hopes. Besides, this is only a beginning, 
a means of amassing a few thousand francs 
to get a start with." 

The father was soon convinced. 



284 Pierre and Jean. 

" That's true. In two years you can lay 
aside six or seven thousand francs, which, if 
well laid out, will help you well on. — What 
do you think, Louise ? " 

" I think Pierre is right." 

Roland exclaimed : 

" I'll go and speak to M. Poulin, whom 
I know very well. He is the judge of the 
Tribunal of Commerce, and is acquainted 
with the affairs of the company. I know 
also M. Lenient, the ship-builder, who is a 
great friend of one of the vice-presidents." 

Jean asked his brother : 

" Would you like me to sound M. Mar- 
chand to-day ? " 

" Yes, I would." 

Then, after reflecting for some instants, 
Pierre resumed : 

" The better plan would be, perhaps, to 
write to my teachers and professors in the 
medical college, who thought very highly of 
me. The doctors of these steamboats are 
often second class. Good strong letters from 
Professors Mas-Roussel, Remusot, Flache, 
and Borriquel would be of more service to me 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 285 

than any number of doubtful recommenda- 
tions. It would be only necessary to present 
these letters through your friend M. Mar- 
chand to the board of directors." 

Jean expressed his approval. 

" A very good idea, very good, indeed ; " 
and he smiled as if reassured, almost content, 
and sure of success, for he was incapable 
of tormenting himself long about anything. 

" You will write to them to-day ? " he 
said. 

"At once, immediately. I'll go and do it. 
I won't take any coffee this morning, I am 
too nervous." 

He arose and left the room. 

Then Jean turned to his mother : 

" Mamma, what are you going to do to- 
day ? " 

" Nothing. I do not know." 

" Will you come with me to Madame Rose- 
milly's ? " 

"Oh, yes, yes ! " 

" You know that it is a matter of necessity 
that I go there to-day." 

"Yes. That is true." 



286 Pierre and Jean. 

" But why a matter of necessity ? " asked 
M. Roland, whose custom was never to 
understand what was said in his presence. 

" Because I promised to call there." 

"All right. That's different." 

And he began to fill his pipe, while the 
mother and son went up-stairs to get their 
hats. 

When they were in the street, Jean said : 

" Will you take my arm, mamma ? " 

He was not in the habit of offering it to 
her, for they usually walked side by side. 
She took it and leaned on him. 

For some time they did not speak, then he 
said : 

" You see that Pierre is quite willing to go 
away." 

She replied : 

" Poor boy ! " 

" Poor boy — why so ? He will not be so 
badly off at all when he is on the Lorraine." 

" No ; I know that I am thinking of so many 
things." 

She thought and thought for a long time, 
with her head bent down, and keeping step 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 287 

with her son ; and then, with that strange 
voice which we assume at times to bring to a 
conclusion a long secret train of thought, she 
exclaimed : 

" What a mean thing it is, this life of ours ! 
If we find perchance a moment of happiness 
in it, it is a sin to abandon one's self to it, 
and one has to pay very dear for it after- 
wards." 

He said in a low tone : 

" Don't talk of it, mamma." 

" How can I help talking ? I am thinking 
of it all the time." 

" You will forget." 

She was silent once more, and then, with an 
expression of profound regret, she continued : 

" Oh, how happy I could have been if I 
had married another man ! " 

At the present moment she was exasperated 
against Roland, and attributed to his homeli- 
ness, his stupidity, his awkwardness, his dul- 
ness of soul, to his whole vulgar look, all the 
responsibility of her fall and her unhappi- 
ness. It was this, the vulgarity of the man, 
that made her be untrue to him, that made 



288 Pierre and Jean. 

her drive to despair one of her sons, and 
made her make to the other the most painful 
confession with which a mother's heart could 
bleed. 

She continued : 

" It is frightful for a young girl to marry 
a husband like mine." 

Jean made no reply. He was thinking of 
the man whose son he had hitherto believed 
he was ; and perhaps the confused notion 
which he had entertained, for some time, 
of that man's commonplace character, the 
persistent irony of his brother, the disdainful 
indifference of others, and even the con- 
tempt of the servant-girl for Roland, had 
prepared his mind for the terrible avowal of 
his mother. He did not care so much about 
being the son of another man ; and after 
the terrible shock of emotion of the day 
before, if he did not display the revolt, the 
indignation, and the anger which Madame 
Roland dreaded, the reason was, that for a 
long time he had been unconsciously suffer- 
ing from the feeling of being the child of this 
stupid lout. 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 



289 



They were now in front of the house of 
Madame Rosemilly. 

She lived on the road to Saint Adresse, on 
the second floor of a large house belonging 
to her. The whole roadstead of Havre was 
visible from the windows. 




When she saw Madame Roland, who was the 
first to enter, instead of extending her hand 
as usual, she opened her arms and embraced 
her, for she foresaw the object of her visit. 

The furniture of the room, in cut velvet, 

was always covered ; and on the walls, papered 

in flower designs, were four engravings bought 

by her first husband, the captain. They rep- 

19 



290 Pierre and Jean. 

resented maritime and sentimental scenes. 
In the first, a fisherman's wife was waving a 
handkerchief on the shore, while there were 
disappearing in the horizon the sails of a 
boat bearing away her husband. In the 
second, the same woman on her knees, on the 
same shore, was wringing her hands as she 
beheld, far away, under a sky full of flashes 
of lightning, and on a sea of impossible 
waves, the foundering of her husband's bark. 

The two other engravings represented 
analogous scenes in a higher class of society. 

A young fair-haired woman, leaning in 
revery over the rail of a large packet-boat, 
just sailing away : she looks at the already 
distant shore with an eye moistened with 
regret. 

Whom has she left behind her ? 

Then the same young woman, seated near 
a window looking on the ocean, has fainted in 
an arm-chair ; a letter has just fallen from her 
lap to the carpet. 

He is dead, then ! What despair ! 

The visitors, generally, were very much 
touched by the commonplace melancholy of 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 291 

these transparent and poetic subjects. The 
whole thing could be understood at once, 
without research, and they felt pity for these 
poor women, although they did not exactly 
know the nature of the sorrow which afflicted 
the more distinguished of these characters. 
But this very doubt increased their pensive- 
ness. She must have lost her betrothed. On 
entering, the eye was inevitably attracted to 
these four subjects, and kept there, as it were, 
by fascination. If it wandered from them for 
a moment, it was only to return to them, and 
contemplate all the time the four expressions 
of the two women, who were as like as 
two sisters. The sharp, well-defined outline, 
with the air of distinction seen on fashion- 
plates, and the shining frame, produced a 
sensation of neatness and order which the 
rest of the furniture made still more conspic- 
uous. 

The chairs were placed in an invariable 
order, some against the wall, some around 
the centre-table. The white immaculate cur- 
tains had folds so straight and so regular that 
one would have liked to disarrange them a 



292 Pierre and Jean. 

little ; and never a single grain of dust tar- 
nished the gilded clock in the style of the 
Empire, where a globe of the world on the 
back of a kneeling Atlas seemed to be ripen- 
ing like a hot-house melon. 

The two ladies, as they took their seats, 
changed a little the normal position of the 
chairs. 

"Have you been out to-day?" Madame 
Roland inquired. 

" No. I confess I am rather tired." 

And then, as if to thank Jean and his 
mother, she spoke of all the pleasure she had 
had in their excursion and their fishing- 
party. 

" Why," she said, " I ate my prawns this 
morning. They were delicious. If you like, 
we will have another excursion some day or 
other." 

The young man interrupted : 

" Before commencing the second, had we 
not better finish the first ? " 

" How is that ? It seems to me it is 
finished." 

" Ah, madame, for my part, I have landed 




THE BETROTHAL. 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 295 

a fish on the rocks of Saint Jouin, which I 
want to take home." 

She assumed a sly, knowing look. 

" You ? What is it ? What did you catch ? " 

" A woman ! and we have come, mamma 
and myself, to ask if she has not changed her 
mind this morning." 

She replied with a smile : 

" No, monsieur ; I never change my mind." 

He extended to her his hand wide open, 
and she placed hers in his with an animated 
gesture ; then he asked : 

" As soon as possible, eh ? " 

"Whenever you like." 

" Six weeks ? " 

" 'Tis all the same to me. What does my 
future mother-in-law think ? " 

Madame Roland replied, with a somewhat 
melancholy smile : 

" As for me, I say nothing. I only thank 
you for loving Jean, for you will render him 
very happy." 

"We will do what we can, mamma." 

Somewhat touched for the first time, 
Madame Rosemilly arose, and flinging both 



296 Pierre and Jean. 

arms around Madame Roland, she gave her a 
long embrace as though she were a child ; and 
under the pressure of this new caress a pow- 
erful emotion filled the aching heart of the 
poor woman. She could not say what her feel- 
ings were ; they were at once sad and sweet : 
she lost a son and gained a daughter. 

When they had taken their seats again and 
were face to face, they took each other's 
hand, and so remained, looking and smiling at 
each other, while Jean seemed almost forgot- 
ten by them. 

Then they talked of a lot of things which 
had to be thought about for the coming mar- 
riage, and when all was arranged and decided, 
Madame Rosemilly appeared suddenly to 
remember a trifling detail, and asked : 

" You have consulted M. Roland, I sup- 
pose ? " 

The same blush at once covered the cheeks 
of mother and son ; it was the mother who 
answered. 

" Oh, no ! what is the use of it ? " 

Then she hesitated, for she felt that some 
explanation was necessary, and continued : 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 297 



" We do everything without speaking to 
him about it. It is enough to tell him what 
we have decided." 

Madame Rosemilly was by no means sur- 
prised, and smiled ; for she thought it quite 
natural, as the old gentleman was of little 
account. 

When Madame Roland and her son were 
again in the street, she said : 

" Let us go to your rooms : I should like 
to rest a while." 

She felt herself without shelter, without 
refuge, and with a horror of her home. 

They entered Jean's apartments. As soon 
as she saw the door shut behind her, she gave 
a great sigh, as if the very turning of the 
lock had placed her in security ; then in 
place of resting herself, as she had intended, 
she began to open the wardrobes and count 
the piles of linen, the number of pocket- 
handkerchiefs and of stockings. She changed 
the usual order in search of more harmonious 
arrangements, which gave greater pleasure to 
her housekeeping eyes ; and when she had 
disposed of things to her taste, laying napkins, 



298 Pierre and Jean. 

drawers, and shirts on their several shelves, 
and dividing all the linen into three chief 
classes— body linen, house linen, and table 
linen — she drew back to contemplate her 
work, and said : 

" Jean, come and see how pretty this is." 

He rose and expressed his admiration for 
the purpose of gratifying her. 

When he had resumed his seat, she sud- 
denly went up to his arm-chair with light step 
from behind him, and, throwing her right arm 
around his neck, she kissed him, while she 
placed on the mantelpiece a little package 
wrapped in white paper which she held in 
her other hand. 

He asked : 

"What is that ?" 

As she made no reply, he understood, for 
he recognized the shape of the frame. 

" Give it to me," he said. 

But she pretended not to hear him, and 
went back toward the wardrobe. He rose 
eagerly and seized this melancholy relic, and, 
crossing the room, locked and double-locked 
it in a drawer of his desk. Then she wiped 



Pierre Resolves to Fly. 299 



away a tear from her eyes with the tips of 
her fingers, and said with a voice rather trem- 
ulous : 

" Now I am going to see if your new ser- 
vant keeps her kitchen in good order. As 
she is out just now I can inspect everything." 



IX. 
PIERRE'S DEPARTURE. 



IX. 



The letters of recommendation from Pro- 
fessors Mas-Roussel, Remusot, Flache, and 
Borriquel, which spoke in most flattering 
terms of their pupil, Dr. Pierre Roland, were 
submitted by M. Marchand to the Transatlan- 
tic Company, and indorsed by MM. Poulin 
of the Tribunal of Commerce, Lenient, ship- 
builder, and Marival, assessor to the mayor 
of Havre and a great friend of Captain 
Beausire. 

It was ascertained that the surgeon of the 
Lorraine was not yet appointed, and Pierre 



304 Pierre and Jean. 

had a chance of being nominated in a few 
days. 

The notification of his appointment was 
given him by the maid Josephine, one morn- 
ing, as he was finishing his toilet. 

His first emotion was that of a prisoner 
under sentence of death, to whom a commu- 
tation of his punishment is communicated, 
and he immediately felt his suffering assuaged 
a little by the thought of hi6 departure, and 
his calm life on board, rocked by the rolling 
waters, always roaming, always wandering. 

He was, at this time, living in his father's 
house like a stranger, dumb and reserved. 
Since the evening when he had allowed the 
shameful secret discovered by him to escape 
him in presence of his brother, he felt that 
he had broken the last ties that bound him 
to his kin. He was torn with remorse at 
having told it to Jean ; he looked on himself 
as despicable, mean, and malicious, and yet 
he felt some comfort in having spoken. 

His eyes never met those of his mother or 
of his brother. The eyes of all had assumed, 
to avoid meeting each other, a surprising mo- 



Pierre's Departure. 305 



bility, and tricks like those of enemies who 
fear to cross each other's path. He was 
always asking himself : " What can she have 
said to Jean ? Did she confess or deny ? 
What does my brother believe ? What does 
he think of her ? What does he think of 
me ? " He could not imagine, and that ex- 
asperated him. Besides, he almost never 
spoke to them, except in Roland's presence, 
so as to avoid questions. 

When he received the letter that announced 
his nomination, he exhibited it, the same 
day, to the family. His father, who had a 
tendency to rejoice over everything, clapped 
his hands. Jean replied in a serious tone, 
but with a heart full of joy : 

" I congratulate you heartily, for I know 
there were many applicants. You owe it 
certainly to the letters from your professors." 

His mother bent her head, and in a low 
tone said 

" I am very glad you have succeeded." 

After dinner he went to the company's 
offices, to obtain information about many 
matters, and asked the name of the surgeon 
20 



306 Pierre ami Jean. 

of the Ficardie that was to sail the next day. 
in order that he might learn from him all the 
details of his new life, and the novel circum- 
stances he would have to meet. 

As Dr. Pirette was on board, he went to 
the ship, and was received in a little room by 
a young man with a light beard, who looked 
like his brother. They had a long conversa- 
tion. 

In the sonorous depths of the huge ship, 
there was perceptible a confused, ceaseless, 
immense agitation, in which the fall of goods 
piled up in the hold was blended with the 
sound of steps, with voices, with the move- 
ment of the derricks hoisting in the cargo, 
with the whistles of the quartermasters, with 
the clang of chains dragging on the decks, or 
wound on the capstan by the hoarse pants of 
the donkey-engine which set the whole mass 
of the great ship into slight vibration. 

But when Pierre had quitted his colleague 
and found himself in the street, a new mel- 
ancholy fell on him, and overshadowed him, 
like those fogs that, coming from the end of 
the world, sweep over the sea and bear in 



Pierre's Departure. 



3°7 



their impalpable density something mysteri- 
ous and impure, like the pestilential breath 
of distant and unhealthy shores. 

Never, in the hours of his greatest suffer- 




ing, had he found himself plunged into such a 
cesspool of misery. The last rent had been 
torn ; he had no ties any more. In tearing 
from his heart the roots of all his affections, 
he had not yet felt that distress as of a lost 
dog which now suddenly seized him. 



308 Pierre and Jean. 

It was not merely a moral and torturing 
pang : it was the wild despair of a shelterless 
beast, the material anguish of a vagabond 
creature which had no longer a roof, and 
which rain, wind, storm, all the brute forces 
of the world could assail. As he set his foot 
on the steamer, and entered the little cabin 
oscillating on the waves, the very flesh of the 
man who had always slept in a quiet, motion- 
less bed revolted against the insecurity of 
all his future days. Hitherto he had felt 
himself protected by the solid walls set in 
earth which surrounded him, and by the cer- 
tainty of repose in the same place, under a 
roof that resisted the winds. Now every- 
thing that was a charm in the warmth of a 
snug room would be a danger and a perpet- 
ual suffering. 

No ground beneath his feet ; only the sea 
that heaves, and roars, and engulfs. No 
space around him, in which to walk, run, lose 
his road ; only some feet of plank to march 
on like a criminal in the midst of other pris- 
oners. No trees, gardens, streets, houses ; 
nothing but water and sky. And then he 



Pierre s Departure. 309 



would feel, unceasingly, the movement of the 
ship beneath his feet. In stormy weather he 
would have to support himself against the 
cabin-sides, or cling to the doors, or hang on 
to the edge of his narrow berth, to avoid fall- 
ing. In calm weather he would notice the 
whirring quiver of the screw, and feel the 
rush of the ship that bore him, in its cease- 
less, regular, exasperating flight. 

He found himself condemned to this life 
of a wandering convict, solely because his 
mother had yielded to her lover's caresses. 

He walked straight before him, broken, for 
the moment, by the desolate melancholy of 
those who are going to expatriate themselves. 

He no longer felt in his heart his haughty 
contempt or disdainful hate of unknown pass- 
ers-by, but a sad longing to speak to them, to 
tell them that he was going to quit France, and 
to be listened to and consoled. In his bosom 
there was a need, like that of the shame- 
faced poor man who holds out his hand — a 
timid yet strong need of feeling that some 
one was sorry for his departure. 

He thought of Marowsko. The old Pole 



310 Pierre and Jean. 



was the only one who loved him well enough 
to feel a true, deep emotion, and the doctor 
resolved to call on him at once. 

When he entered the shop, the druggist, 
who was pounding some powders in the bot- 
tom of a marble mortar, gave a slight start 
and quitted his work. 

" We never see you any more now," he 
said. 

The young man explained that he had 
numerous affairs to look after, without be- 
traying the reason, and took his seat, asking : 

" Well, how is business going on ? " 

Business was not going on. Competition 
was terrible, sick folks scarce and poor in that 
workingman's quarter. There was no sale 
except for cheap medicines, and the doctors 
did not prescribe those rare and complex 
remedies that give a profit of five hundred 
per cent. The old fellow concluded : 

" If it lasts three months longer like this, 
the shop must be shut up. Did 1 not reckon 
on you, my dear doctor, I would have turned 
boot-black already." 

Pierre felt his heart contract, and he de- 



Pierre's Departure. 3 1 1 

cided to give the blow abruptly, as it had to 
be done. 

" Oh, me ? I cannot be any longer of any 
aid to you. I leave Havre at the beginning 
of next month." 

Marowsko took off his glasses, so great was 
his emotion, and cried : 

" You — you ! What's that you say ? " 

" I say I am going away, my poor friend." 

The old man was prostrated ; he felt his 
last hope crumble ; and he took a sudden 
revulsion against this man, whom he had fol- 
lowed, and loved, and in whom he had such 
confidence, and who abandoned him in this 
way. 

He stammered out : 

" You are not going to betray me in your 
turn, are you ? " 

Pierre felt himself so moved that he longed 
to embrace him. 

" I am not betraying you. I cannot find a 
good place to start in here, and I am going 
as a doctor on a transatlantic steamer." 

" O M. Pierre, you promised so often to 
help me along in life ! " 



312 Pierre and Jean. 

" What would you have ? I must live my- 
self ; I have not a sou ! " 

Marowsko repeated : 

" It is wrong, it is wrong — what you are 
doing. Nothing now for me, but to die of 
hunger. At my age, it is all over. It is 
wrong. You abandon a poor old man who 
came here to be near you. It is wrong." 

Pierre wished to explain, give his reasons, 
and prove that he could not act otherwise. 
The Pole would not listen, in his indignation 
at such desertion, and ended by saying, with 
an allusion, beyond question, to some politi- 
cal events : 

"You Frenchmen never keep your prom- 
ises ! " 

Pierre then rose, annoyed in turn, and taking 
a higher tone, said : 

" You are unjust, M. Marowsko. It re- 
quired powerful motives to make me adopt 
the decision I have made, and you ought to 
understand that. Good-day. I hope that 
next time I shall find you more reason- 
able." 

He left the shop. 



Pierre's Departure. 313 

"Well," he thought, "no one will have a 
sincere regret for me." 

He thought and thought of all those he 
knew or had known; and, in the midst of all 
the faces that flitted through his memory, he 
came at length to that of the girl in the 
beer-shop, who had made him suspect his 
mother. 

He hesitated, for he nursed an instinctive 
grudge against her ; then, by a sudden change 
of thought, " She was right, after all," he 
made his decision, and set out to find the 
street where she lived. 

The beer-shop was, as it happened, full of 
people and full of smoke. The customers — 
shopkeepers and workingmen, for it was a 
holiday — were shouting, laughing, calling out 
orders ; and the landlord himself was serving 
them, running from table to table, carrying off 
the empty glasses, and bringing them back 
full of froth. 

When Pierre found a place, not far from 
the desk, he waited in the hope that the girl 
would see and recognize him. 

She, however, passed and repassed in front 



314 Pierre and Jean. 

of him, without a glance, trotting about with 
a little coquettish swing of her petticoats. 

He knocked, at last, on the table with a 
coin. She came up. 

"What do you wish, sir?" 

She did not look at him ; her mind was 
lost in calculating the glasses that she had 
served. 

" Is that the way to say ' Good-day ' to 
one's friends ? " he said. 

She turned her eyes on him, and in a tired 
voice : 

" Oh, it is you ! You look well. But I 
have no time to-day. Do you want a beer ? " 

"Yes, a beer." 

When she brought it, he resumed : 

" I came to say good-by ; I am going away." 

She replied with indifference : 

" Oh, stuff ! Where are you going ? " 

" To America." 

" They say it's a fine country." 

Not a word more. He must have, indeed, 
been foolish to speak to her on such a day. 
There were too many people in the place. 

Pierre walked toward the sea. When lie 



Pierre's Departure. 315 



reached the jetty, he saw the Pearl return- 
ing, with his father and Captain Beausire on 
board. The sailor, Papagris, was rowing, and 
the two others, sitting in the stern, smoked 
their pipes with an air of perfect happiness. 
As he saw them pass, he thought : " Blessed 
are the simple in spirit." 

He seated himself on one of the benches 
of the breakwater, to try and benumb him- 
self into a brute-like somnolence. 

When he returned home in the evening, 
his mother, without daring to raise her eyes 
to him, said : 

" You will have a deal to do to get ready 
for leaving, and I am rather perplexed. I 
have already ordered your body-linen, and 
have seen the tailor about your clothes ; but 
is there nothing else you need, things I do 
not know about, perhaps ? '' 

He opened his lips to say " No, nothing," 
but he thought that he must, at least, accept 
means of dressing decently, and replied, in a 
very calm tone : 

"I do not know yet, myself. I'll ask at 
the office." 



3 16 Pierre and Jean. 

He obtained there a list of indispensable 
articles. His mother, on receiving it from 
his hands, looked at him, for the first time 
skice a long while back, and she had in her 
eyes the humble, soft, sad, appealing look of 
poor dogs that have been whipped and are 
be gging pardon. 

On the i st of October, the Lorraine, sail- 
ing from Saint Nazaire, entered the port of 
Havre, to sail on the 7th of the same month 
for her destination of New York. Pierre 
Roland had to take possession of the little 
floating cabin in which henceforth his life 
would be imprisoned. 

Next day as he was going out he met his 
mother on the stairs ; she was waiting for 
him, and said in an almost unintelligible 
voice : 

" You do not want me to help you in 
arranging your things on the boat ? " 

" No, thanks ; everything is complete," he 
murmured. 

" I want so much to see your cabin." 

" It is not worth the trouble. It is very 
plain and very small." 




ON THE STAIRCASE. 



Pierre's Departure 319 



He went on, leaving her prostrated, lean- 
ing against the wall, with her face deadly 
wan. 

Now, Roland, who had visited the Lorraine 
that very same day, talked during dinner of 
nothing but that magnificent ship, and was 
much astonished that his wife had no desire 
to see it, since their son was to sail in it. 

During the following days Pierre scarcely 
lived with his family. He was nervous, irri- 
table, harsh, and his hard language seemed to 
smite every one. But on the evening before 
his departure he suddenly appeared much 
changed and softened. As he was embrac- 
ing his parents before going to sleep on board 
for the first time, he asked : 

" You will come and say ' Good-by ' to me 
to-morrow, at the ship ? " 

Roland cried : 

" Yes, yes, by Jove ! Won't we, Louise ?" 

" Certainly," she said in a low voice. 

Pierre continued : 

" We leave at eleven, sharp. You must be 
down there at half-past nine, at the latest." 

" Hallo ! " cried the father : " here's an 



320 Pierre and Jean. 



idea. When we leave you, we will run as 
fast as we can and go aboard the Pearl, and 
wait for you outside the jetties, and get 
another sight of you. Is that a good notion, 
Louise ? " 

" Yes, decidedly." 

Roland went on : 

" In this way we shall not be lost in the 
crowd that encumbers the pier when the 
American boats sail. One can never find one's 
friends in the throng. Does that suit you ? " 

" Oh, yes. Let us arrange it so.' - 

An hour later Pierre was stretched on his 
little sailor's bed, long and narrow as a coffin. 
He lay a long time with his eyes open, think- 
ing of all that had passed during the last two 
months in his life, and, above all, in his soul. 
Through his having suffered and made others 
suffer, his aggressive and vengeful grief had 
worn itself out, like a foaming wave. He 
had scarcely the courage to be angry with 
any one, or for any cause whatever ; he let 
his wrath and indignation toss and drift like 
his life. He felt himself so weary of strug- 
gling, weary of smiting, weary of hating, weary 



Pierre's Departure. 321 



of everything, that he could bear it no longer, 
and he sought to numb his heart into oblivion, 
as one falls into sleep. He heard, vaguely, 
around him the strange sounds of the ship — 
slight sounds, scarcely perceptible in that calm 
night in harbor — and he felt, in the wound 
hitherto so agonizing, only the painful ting- 
ling of the cicatrizing scar. 

He slept profoundly till the movements of 
the sailors woke him from his repose. It 
was daylight, and the tidal train with the 
passengers from Paris arrived at the quay. 

Then he wandered about the ship, among 
the busy, restless crowd of people looking for 
their cabins, calling to each other, question- 
ing and answering one another, in all the 
bewilderment of the beginning of a voyage. 
After a salute to the captain, and a shake 
of the hand to his comrade the purser, he 
entered the cabin, where some Englishmen 
were already dozing in the corners. The 
large room, with its walls of white marble 
framed in gold bands, prolonged endlessly 
in the mirrors the view of its long tables 
flanked by two unlimited lines of revolving 

21 



322 Pierre and Jean. 



chairs, in pomegranate-colored velvet. This 
then was the vast floating cosmopolitan hall, 
where the rich people of every continent had 
to dine in common. Its opulent luxury was 
that of large hotels, theatres, public places 
— a luxury that was commonplace and self- 
asserting, which satisfied the eyes of million- 
naires. The doctor was about to pass into 
the part of the ship reserved for die second 
class, when he remembered that on the pre- 
vious evening a great herd of emigrants had 
embarked : so he went to the 'tween decks. 
When he entered there, he was struck by a 
nauseating stench of poor dirty humanity ; 
the stink of naked flesh, more sickening than 
that of the hair or wool of beasts. There, 
in a sort of low, dark tunnel, like the 
galleries in mines, he saw hundreds of men, 
women, and children stretched on planks, tier 
above tier, or grovelling in heaps on the 
floor. He could not distinguish faces, but 
he dimly saw this filthy crowd in rags, this 
crowd of wretches conquered in life, squeezed 
out, crushed down — he saw it starting with a 
skinny wife and emaciated children, for an 



Pi €7- re's Departure. 323 

unknown country, where they hoped not to 
die of hunger, perhaps. 

As he thought of the past toil, the wasted 
toil, the barren efforts, the bitter strife re- 
newed each day in vain, the energy displayed 
by these beggars who were going to begin 
again, they did not know where, this life of 
horrible wretchedness, the doctor felt a de- 
sire to cry out to them, " Dump yourselves 
into the sea, with your women and your 
brats ! " and his heart was so wrung by pity 
that he fled, unable to bear the sight. 

His father, his mother, his brother, and 
Madame Rosemilly were already waiting for 
him in his cabin. 

" So soon ? " he said. 

" Yes," replied Madame Roland with a 
trembling voice; "we wished to have time 
to see you a little." 

He looked at her. She was in black as if 
in mourning, and he suddenly perceived that 
her hair, that was merely gray the month 
before, had now become quite white. 

He could with difficulty seat the four visit- 
ors in his little room, and he himself jumped 



324 Pierre and Jean. 

on his bed. The door was left open, and 
through it was seen a crowd as numerous as 
that in a street on a holiday ; for all the 
friends of the passengers, and an army of 
mere sightseers, had invaded the huge packet- 
ship. They walked along the passages, 
through the salons, everywhere, and some 
heads were poked into the room, while voices 
outside muttered, " That's the doctor's room." 

Then Pierre closed the door ; but when 
he found himself shut up with his friends he 
longed to open it again, for the movement 
on the ship outside concealed from them their 
constraint and their silence. 

At length Madame Rosemilly determined 
to speak. 

" Very little air comes through these small 
windows." 

" It is a dead light," said Pierre. 

He pointed out the thickness that ren- 
dered the glass capable of resisting the most 
violent shocks, and then he explained at 
length the method of closing it. Roland 
next asked : 

" Do you keep your medicines here ? " 



Pierre s Departure. 325 



The doctor opened a locker, and let them 
see a row of phials that bore Latin names on 
squares of white paper. 

He took one of them and enumerated the 
properties of the matter it contained ; then 
a second, then a third, and delivered a lec- 
ture on therapeutics which seemed to be 
listened to with great attention. 

Roland shook his head, repeating : 

" Is it not interesting ? " 

A gentle knock at the door was heard. 

" Come in," cried Pierre. 

And Captain Beau sire appeared. 

He said, as he held out his hand : 

" I am late in coming, because I did not 
want to cause any constraint." 

He, too, had to sit on the bed. Then the 
silence recommenced. 

Suddenly, however, Captain Beausire 
pricked up his ear. Some order had reached 
him through the partition, and he announced : 

" It is time for us to go if we want to get 
on board the Pearl and see you again as 
you come out, and say ' Good-by ' in the 
open sea." 



326 Pierre and Jean. 



Roland made a great point of doing this, 
doubtless with a view to impress the passen- 
gers on the Lorraine, and rose hurriedly. 

" Come, good-by, my boy." 

He kissed Pierre's mustaches, and then 
opened the door. 

Madame Roland did not stir, and re- 
mained with downcast eyes and very pale 
face. 

Her husband touched her on the arm. 

"Come, let us be off. We have not a 
moment to lose." 

She stood up, took a step toward her son, 
and held out to him, one after the other, two 
cheeks as white as wax, which he kissed with- 
out saying a word. Then he shook Madame 
Rosemilly's hand, and his brother's, asking 
him : 

" When is the wedding to be ? " 

" I do not yet know precisely. We will 
make it dovetail in with one of your voyages." 

Finally they all left the room, and went up 
to the deck, which was encumbered with the 
public and porters and sailors. 

The steam was roaring in the enormous 



Pierre's Departure. 327 



belly of the ship, which seemed to snort with 
impatience. 

" Good-by," said Roland, still in a hurry. 

"Good-by," replied Pierre, standing on 
the edge of one of the little wooden gang- 
ways that led from the Lorraine to the 
quay. 

He again shook all their hands, and his 
family departed. 

" Quick, quick, into the carriage ! " cried 
old Roland. 

A cab was waiting for them, and took them 
to the outer harbor, where Papagris had the 
Pearl all ready to put off. 

There was not a breath of air ; it was one 
of those calm, dry days of autumn, when 
the smooth sea seems cold and hard as 
steel. 

Jean seized an oar, the sailor flung the 
other into the rowlocks, and they began to 
row. On the breakwaters, the jetties, even 
on the granite parapets, there was an innu- 
merable crowd, jostling and noisy, that waited 
for the Lorraine. 

The Pearl passed between these two bil- 



328 Pierre and Jean. 

lows of humanity, and was soon outside the 
mole. 

Captain Beausire, seated between the two 
ladies, held the tiller, and said : 

" You will see that we shall be directly in 
her course, down there." 

The two rowers pulled with all their might 
to get out as far as possible. All at once 
Roland exclaimed : 

" Here she is ! I see her rigging and her 
two chimneys. She is coming out of the 
basin." 

"Pull, boys," repeated Beausire. 

Madame Roland took her handkerchief 
from her pocket and held it to her eyes. 

Roland was standing up and clinging to 
the mast. 

" Now she is swinging into the outer har- 
bor. She does not stir. She is in motion 
again. She has to take a tug. She is off ! 
Hurrah ! She is between the jetties. Don't 
you hear the people cheering her ? It is the 
Neptune that is towing her — I saw her bow 
just now. There it is — there it is ! My 
God, what a ship ! My God, just look ! " 



Pierre s Departure. 329 

Madame Rosemilly and Beausire turned 
round ; the two men ceased to row ; Madame 
Roland alone was motionless. 

The huge packet-ship, towed by a pow- 
erful tugboat, which looked like a caterpil- 
lar before her, came slowly and royally 
out of harbor. The good folk of Havre, 
massed on the moles, the beach, and at the 
windows, were suddenly seized with patri- 
otic zeal, and cried, " Hurrah for the Lor- 
raine ! " acclaiming and applauding her 
stately departure — this childbirth by a great 
maritime city, that gave to the sea her fairest 
child. 

But she, when she had cleared the narrow 
passage enclosed between the two granite 
walls, at length found herself free, and, cast- 
ing off her tug, started alone, like some huge 
monster racing over the water. 

" Here she is ! Here she is ! " Roland 
kept crying. " She is coming straight on 
us." 

Beausire, radiant with delight, repeated : 

" Did not I tell you so ? Eh ? Don't I 
know their course ? " 



33° Pierre and Jean. 



Jean, in a low voice, whispered to his 
mother : 

" Mamma, look — she is coming." 

Madame Roland uncovered her eyes, that 
were blinded with her tears. 

On came the Lorraine, at full speed after 
clearing the harbor, in the clear, calm, fine 
weather. Beausire, with his glass levelled, 
cried : 

" Attention ! M. Pierre is at the stern, all 
alone, well in sight. Attention ! " 

The Lorraine, high as a mountain, swift 
as a train, passed the Pearl almost within 
touching distance. 

Madame Roland, distracted and heart- 
broken, stretched out her arms toward the 
ship, and saw her son, her son Pierre, with 
his gold-laced cap, fling to her with both 
hands his farewell kisses. 

But he went away in the distance, vanished, 
disappeared ; he already seemed quite small, 
effaced like an imperceptible spot on the 
gigantic vessel. She tried to distinguish him 
still, and could not recognize him. 

Jean took her hand. 




THE FAREWELL. 



Pierre's Departure. ^33 



" You saw him ?" he said. 

" Yes, I saw him. How good he is ! " 

They turned their course back to the city. 

" By Jove, she goes fast ! " M. Roland de- 
clared with enthusiastic conviction. 

The packet-boat, indeed, diminished mo- 
ment by moment, as if melted into the ocean. 
Madame Roland turned her eyes to it, and 
saw- it plunge into the horizon toward an 
unknown country at the other end of the 
world. On that ship which nothing could 
stop, on that ship which soon she would no 
longer see, was her son, her poor son. And 
it seemed to her that half of her heart went 
with him ; it seemed to her, also, as if her 
life was ended ; it seemed to her that never 
more again would she behold her child. 

" Why are you crying ? " asked her hus- 
band. " He will be back in less than a 
month." 

She sobbed out : 

" I do not know. I cry because I am not 
well." 

When they returned to land, Beausire 
quitted them at once to go and breakfast 



334 Pierre and Jean. 

with a friend. Jean went on in front with 
Madame Rosemilly, and Roland said to his 
wife : 

" He has a good figure, all the same, our 
Jean." 

" Yes," replied the mother. 

And, as she was too troubled in mind to 
think of what she was saying, she added : 

" I am very glad he is going to marry 
Madame Rosemilly." 

M. Roland was stupefied. 

" Oh, stuff ! What ? He is going to marry 
Madame Rosemilly ? " 

" Yes. We counted on asking your opinion 
this very day." 

" Well, well ! Is it long since this affair 
has been on hand ?" 

" No ; only a few days. Jean wished to 
be sure of being accepted by her before con- 
sulting you." 

Roland rubbed his hands. 

" Excellent, excellent. Nothing could be 
better. I approve of it decidedly." 

As they were about quitting the quay and 
taking the Boulevard Francois I., his wife 



Pierre s Departure. 



335 



turned once more to cast a last look at the 
open sea ; but she saw nothing but a little 
gray trail of smoke, so distant, so slight, that 
it had the appearance of a wreath of mist. 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



The Stern of the Pearl, 



FRONTISPIECE 



1>asket of Fish, page 5 

Cai'e La Heve, " 13 

Landing from the Pearl, 25 

The Reading of the Will, .... 41 

The Harbor at the (Ikand Quay, . 53 

Pierre on the Jetty, 59 

The Semaphore on the Jetty, . . 69 

The Public Garden, " 83 



338 List of Illustrations. 

The Beer-House PA ce 89 

Madame Rosemilly's Toast, . . . . " 107 

In the Roadstead, "in 

The Pearl Going to Sea 121 

The Jeweller's Shop, " 127 

In the Night " 145 

The Light on the Jetty " 150 

The Likeness, " [61 

Trouville, 169 

At Trouville, on the Beach, . . . 173 

The Parasols at Trouville, . . " 188 

Excursion to Saint Jouin 199 

Low Water, " 203 

Looking for Prawns, 215 

Nets and Baskets, " 225 

Sea View from Sainte-Adresse, ..." 231 

Jean's Rooms, 235 

The Confession 251 

A Corner of the Harbor, .... 263 

The Basin for the American Liners, . 273 

The Maid Servant, 277 



List of Illustrations. 339 

A Corner <>e Sainte-Ad esse, . . . page 289 

The Betrothal, " 293 

The Lorraine Leaving Port, . . 307 

On the Staircase, 317 

The Farewell, . , " 331 

The Open Sea " 335 



ALPHONSE DAUDET 









Tartarin 



<wf on the 










Illustrate 

by 

ROSSI, ARAN DA MYRBACtf" "^%. 
MONTENARD, DE BEAUMONT 



flfSs*'* V:*.r^ffS^^K^5?^ 



w 



GKOROK KOUTLKDGK AND SONS, Limit] 

LONDON, GLASGOW, MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK 



ALPHONSE DAUDET 



Tartarin 




Tarascon 



$Uusintkb bg 

MONTEGUT, DE MYRBACH, 
PICARD, ROSS* 



V 



EORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

LONDON, GT.ASGOW, MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK 



ALPHONSE DAUDET 



Years 
Paris 




GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

LONDON, GLASGOW, MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK 



ALPHONSE DAUDET 



Recollections of a 

Literary 
Man 




GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

LoXDoX, GLASGOW, MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK 



Collection Artistique Guillaums et C ,b 




Sappho 



alphSnIe daudet 



PARIS 
GUILLAUME et C ,k 

228 BOULEVARD D'ENFER 2 2 



ALPHONSE DAUDET 



La 

Belle- 
Ik Nivernaise 




C^ 



by 

MONTEGUT 



GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 
i.omdon, Glasgow, Manchester and new york 



GUY DE MAUPASSANT. 



Afloat 



ffltify Illustrations 

by 

R I O U 
<S n g x a b t fr 

by 
GUILLAUME BROTHERS 




GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

LONDON, GLASGOW, MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK 






